Dr. Preeti Raghavan confirms that she had full access to all the data in the study and had final responsibility for the decision to submit
for publication. Spasticity, muscle stiffness and contracture cause severe disability after central nervous system injury. However, current
treatment options for spasticity produce muscle weakness which can impede movement, and do not directly address muscle stiffness. Here we
propose that the accumulation of hyaluronan within muscles promotes the development of muscle stiffness, and report that treatment with the
enzyme hyaluronidase increases upper limb movement and reduces muscle stiffness without producing weakness. 20 patients with unilateral
upper limb spasticity received multiple intramuscular injections of human recombinant hyaluronidase with saline at a single visit. The
safety and efficacy of the injections, passive and active movement, and muscle stiffness at eight upper limb joints were assessed at four
time points: pre-injection (T0), within 2 weeks (T1), within 4–6 weeks (T2), and within 3–5 months post-injection (T3). There were no
clinically significant adverse effects from the injections. Passive movement at all joints, and active movement at most joints increased at
T1, and persisted at T2 and T3 for most joints. The modified Ashworth scores also declined significantly over time post-injection.
Hyaluronidase injections offer a safe and potentially efficacious treatment for muscle stiffness in neurologically impaired individuals.
These results warrant confirmation in placebo-controlled clinical trials. • The accumulation of hyaluronan within muscles contributes to the
development of muscle stiffness after neurologic injury. • Intramuscular injection of hyaluronidase reduces muscle stiffness and increases
passive and active movement. • The injections did not produce weakness or clinically significant adverse effects in the reported case
series. The accumulation of hyaluronan within muscles contributes to the development of muscle stiffness after neurologic injury.
Intramuscular injection of hyaluronidase reduces muscle stiffness and increases passive and active movement. The injections did not produce
weakness or clinically significant adverse effects in the reported case series. Muscle stiffness contributes to disability after neurologic
injury. However both the cause of the muscle stiffness and its treatment remain to be established. We propose that the accumulation of
hyaluronan within muscles promotes the development of muscle stiffness. We report that the enzyme hyaluronidase, which hydrolyzes
hyaluronan, reduces muscle stiffness and increases both passive and active movement in individuals with spastic paralysis after cerebral
injury. The treatment takes effect within days to 2 weeks, lasts for at least three months, does not produce weakness, and is safe without
clinically significant adverse effects. These results present a promising treatment for a widespread problem. Spasticity is a common
movement disorder after neurologic injury of cerebral and spinal origin such as stroke, traumatic brain injury, brain tumor, cerebral palsy,
spinal cord injury, and multiple sclerosis. Upper limb spasticity is associated with reduced functional independence and a four-fold
increase in direct care costs during the first year post-stroke alone (Lundstrom et al., 2010). The prevalence of spasticity increases over
time, contributing to further disability long after the neurologic injury (Lundstrom et al., 2008). Spasticity is challenging to treat
because the underlying neural and non-neural mechanisms and their interactions are not fully understood. The neural mechanism underlying
spasticity is hyper-excitability of the stretch reflex due to disinhibition of cortical influences on spinal cord circuitry, which results
in velocity-dependent increase in tonic stretch reflexes (Lance, 1980). However, many patients with spasticity do not show any signs of
hyperreflexia (Sinkjaer and Magnussen, 1994). Instead, muscle stiffness, defined here as increased resistance to passive movement, is the
most common presenting sign in individuals with spasticity (Sheean and McGuire, 2009). Muscle stiffness adds further insult to the
underlying weakness. It both prevents full passive movement (leading to abnormal posturing that can become fixed over time) and makes active
movement more difficult in patients who are already weak from the neurologic injury. Non-neural peripheral mechanisms are thought to cause
muscle stiffness (Burke et al., 2013, Stecco et al., 2014), although this has not been shown conclusively. Current treatment options for
spasticity include oral medications such as benzodiazepines, baclofen, and tizanidine that are central nervous system depressants used to
suppress spinal hyper-excitability, and local injections of botulinum toxin used to suppress muscle over-activity. Whereas the oral
medications can produce cognitive deficits, fatigue, and muscle weakness, botulinum toxin injections produce focal muscle weakness (Phadke
et al., 2015). It is thus necessary to carefully balance the risks and benefits of treatment, which often remains inadequate. Furthermore,
these treatments do not directly address muscle stiffness. Here, we propose the Hyaluronan Hypothesis, which postulates that the
accumulation of hyaluronan within muscles promotes the development of muscle stiffness. We report that the enzyme hyaluronidase, which
hydrolyzes hyaluronan, and is available for off-label clinical use, increases both passive and active joint movement, and reduces muscle
stiffness in individuals with upper limb spasticity. These results fill a critical gap in the understanding of muscle stiffness, and present
a promising treatment for a vexing and widespread problem. Paralysis and immobility from central nervous system injury leads to rapid
atrophy of muscle fibers (Springer et al., 2014), with a relative increase in the proportion of extracellular matrix, particularly in the
perimysium surrounding the neurovascular tissues (de Bruin et al., 2014). Hyaluronan, a non-sulfated high molecular weight
glycosaminoglycan, is particularly abundant around the endomysium, perimysium and epimysium of muscles (Piehl-Aulin et al., 1985, Laurent et
al., 1991), where it provides lubrication to facilitate sliding and myofascial force transmission within and between muscles (Huijing and
Jaspers, 2005). The concentration of hyaluronan can increase in serum, due to increased production after cerebral injury (Al'Qteishat et
al., 2006), and in muscles from immobility (Okita et al., 2004), due to increased production, and/or decreased degradation (Jenkins et al.,
2004). At high concentrations, hyaluronan itself, as well as protein-crosslinked networks or fibrillar assemblies of hyaluronan, can
dramatically increase the viscoelasticity of the extracellular matrix (Matteini et al., 2009, Cowman et al., 2015); this decreases sliding
of muscle fibers and reduces force transmission (Purslow, 2010), leading to muscle shortening. The shortening may predominate in muscles
with large myofascial expansions (Stecco, 2015) such as the pectoralis major, the biceps brachii, and pronator teres, connecting them
together and leading to posturing of the upper limb in a typical flexor synergy pattern characterized by shoulder internal rotation, elbow
flexion, and forearm pronation. Untreated and unchecked, this abnormal chronic posturing can lead to fibrosis and contracture. In fact, the
accumulation of hyaluronan signals fibrosis (Jenkins et al., 2004). The aggregation of hyaluronan can disturb the balance of forces between
the agonist and antagonist muscles leading to co-contraction, muscle fatigue, and excessive torques during movement (Hufschmidt and Mauritz,
1985). Thus the Hyaluronan Hypothesis provides a biomechanical explanation of how non-neural factors contribute to the development of muscle
stiffness. To test the Hyaluronan Hypothesis, we used the enzyme hyaluronidase to hydrolyze hyaluronan, reduce its molecular weight, and
lower the viscosity of the extracellular matrix (Cowman et al., 2015). Hyaluronidase modifies the permeability of connective tissue through
the hydrolysis of hyaluronan by splitting the glucosaminidic bond between C1 of an N-acetylglucosamine moiety and C4 of a glucuronic acid
moiety. This temporarily decreases the viscosity of the extracellular matrix. The purpose of this case series is to describe the safety,
tolerability, and preliminary efficacy of intramuscular injections of off-label human recombinant hyaluronidase-saline injections in
increasing passive and active joint movement and reducing upper limb muscle stiffness in patients with cerebral injury. Human recombinant
hyaluronidase has been FDA-approved since 2005 as a tissue permeability modifier. It is currently indicated as an adjuvant in subcutaneous
fluid administration for achieving hydration, to increase the dispersion and absorption of other injected drugs, such as cancer
chemotherapeutics, and in subcutaneous urography for improving resorption of radiopaque agents. We present evidence that intramuscular
injections of off-label human recombinant hyaluronidase offer a safe and potentially efficacious treatment for muscle stiffness that can
increase passive and active joint movement, without producing weakness, in individuals with neurologic injury. From May 2014 to September
2015, twenty patients (13 male and 7 female) between 10–77 years with moderately severe upper limb muscle stiffness in more than one joint,
consented to and received off-label injections of recombinant hyaluronidase in combination with preservative-free normal saline, in the
outpatient hand clinic at the Hospital for Joint Diseases, New York University Langone Medical Center. The patients had exhausted all
available options with limited benefit, or were referred by providers seeking this specific off-label treatment. The institutional review
board approved the case series (# i15-00333). All procedures were performed in accordance with the Guidelines for Good Clinical Practice as
issued by the International Conference on Harmonization of Technical Requirements for Registration of Pharmaceuticals for Human Use. The
investigation and the use of patient data for research purposes were in accordance with the Declaration of the World Medical Association,
and the study was performed in accordance with ethical standards on human experimentation as per the Helsinki Declaration. The inclusion
criteria for the present case series were: informed consent for the procedure and for documentation of video recordings of joint movement
for clinical and academic purposes, and moderately severe muscle stiffness in more than one joint of a single upper limb defined by a
modified Ashworth scale (MAS) score of ≥ 2. The modified Ashworth scale measures resistance to passive movement and is a common clinically
used measure of muscle stiffness rather than spasticity. Exclusion criteria were severe sensory aphasia, bilateral upper limb weakness
precluding compliance with a home exercise program using the unaffected limb to mobilize the affected limb, concurrent treatment of
spasticity with other injectable agents such as botulinum toxin injections, and recent changes in the treatment of spasticity or underlying
medical problems. Initial suitability for the injections was assessed by obtaining a history of known hypersensitivity to eggs or vaccines
produced in the same manner as human recombinant hyaluronidase. The 20 cases are described in Table 1. Hyaluronidase is supplied as a
sterile, clear, colorless, non-preserved, ready-for-use solution. Each mL contains 150 USP units of recombinant human hyaluronidase with
8.5 mg sodium chloride, 1.4 mg dibasic sodium phosphate, 1 mg albumin human, 1.5 mg l-methionine, 0.2 mg polysorbate 80, and hydrochloric
acid and sodium hydroxide added for pH adjustment; it has a pH of ~ 7.0 and an osmolality of 280–340 mOsm/kg. Given that hyaluronidase is
known to be antigenic, a preliminary skin test for hypersensitivity to human recombinant hyaluronidase was performed. An intradermal
injection of approximately 0.02 mL (3 units) of a 150 units/mL solution was injected. No erythema, itching, or wheal was noted in or around
the injection site at 5 or 20 min in any of the patient's injected. There are no reported contraindications to intramuscular injection of
hyaluronidase provided routine precautions to avoid intravascular injections are followed (Moore, 1950). The use of intramuscular procaine
and hyaluronidase was previously reported for the treatment for spastic flatfoot (Locke, 1952). The dose of intramuscular hyaluronidase was
determined according to each patient's pattern and extent of muscle stiffness, but the maximum dose used in this cohort was 600 IU, with no
> 75 IU injected into a single site. The dosage selected is well below the threshold of toxicity of hyaluronidase (Seifter, 1950).
Hylauronidase was mixed with saline in a 1:1 ratio, with 1 mL (150 IU) of hyaluronidase diluted with 1 mL of normal saline. The typical
recommended dose of hyaluronidase is 150 IU. We chose to dilute it further because the modification in tissue permeability induced by the
administration of hyaluronidase is influenced not only by enzyme concentration, but also by the volume and pressure of the injection
(Hechter, 1947). Dilution also resulted in a lower dosage overall across all the muscles injected. The dilution was constant across all
patients and a 0.7 mm 30G needle was used for all the injections. The skin was cleaned with antiseptic swabs, and the injections were
administered using sterile aseptic technique by the same operator (PR). Surface anatomical landmarks were used to locate the muscles
injected and precautions were taken to avoid intravascular injection. Synergistically acting muscles in one or more spatial planes that
appeared to contribute most to the stiffness along the myofascial chain of the upper limb (Stecco, 2015) were selected for injection. Fig. 1
shows the most common muscles injected across all patients. Patients were advised to use a warm compress for local soreness around the
injections sites. Given that immobility is hypothesized to contribute to the alteration in muscle stiffness, the patients were encouraged to
continue current therapy, and were prescribed a home exercise program of stretching and passive movements for the affected upper limb (Table
2). Patients underwent a thorough neurologic and musculoskeletal exam to document the extent of passive and active movement restriction and
muscle stiffness in the affected upper limb at four time-points: pre-injection (T0), and post-injection within 2 weeks (T1), between
4–6 weeks (T2) and within 3–5 months (T3). Patients #1–6 (Table 1) were closely monitored within 1–3 days after the injections to examine
the time of onset of therapeutic effect, if any. Safety was assessed by examination for adverse events and clinically significant changes in
vital signs (body temperature, diastolic and systolic pressure, heart rate) immediately post-injection and over the period of follow-up.
Adverse events were sought through interviews, during which patients were encouraged to report any problems. Each patient was assessed by
the same physician throughout the course of treatment. All complaints were also assessed by an unbiased clinic nurse and documented in the
medical record. Passive and active movements were measured from video recordings of eight joint movements: shoulder abduction and forearm
pronation and supination (in the frontal plane), and shoulder forward flexion, elbow flexion and extension, and wrist flexion and extension
(in the sagittal plane), taken at each visit. The movements were recorded with the camera facing perpendicular to the plane of the movement.
Each movement was repeated three times passively, and when possible, actively. For the first six patients who had little ability to move
actively (#1–3, 5, and 6), we did not anticipate any changes in active movement; therefore these were not recorded. Finger and hand
movements were recorded for many patients, but these could not be analyzed consistently. For examples, see videos of passive and active
movements (Video 1, Video 2, Video 3, Video 4, Video 5, submitted with informed consent from patients). Joint excursions were extracted from
the videos using commercially available video analysis software (Dartfish 7.0), which enables the measurement of angular movements digitally
for quantitative clinical movement analysis. It is found to have moderate to excellent reliability for measurement of upper limb movement
amplitude (interclass correlation coefficient, ICC = 0.98–0.99), (Melton et al., 2011) and inter-rater reliability for functional upper limb
movement (ICC = 0.68–1.00) (Khadilkar et al., 2014). We have further validated this method with 3-dimensional motion analysis and
conventional goniometry in the clinical research laboratory (unpublished data). However, the quality of the movements, the degree of
compensation when isolated movements are not possible, and the angle of the camera can produce errors in determination of the excursions,
particularly for forearm pronation and supination. The technique for measurement of forearm pronation and supination using a camera placed
in front of the forearm tended to overestimate the angle of excursion, which were therefore capped at 100°. To control for measurement
errors and inadvertent bias, the best of the three trials performed was evaluated. Also, two authors (AS and MM) independently extracted the
joint excursions from the same videos and the degree of correlation between their measurements was assessed. Muscle stiffness, defined as
the resistance to passive movement, was assessed with the modified Ashworth scale (MAS) at each time point. The modified Ashworth scores do
not take the velocity dependency of the resistance to passive movement into account, and it is recommended that this scale should no longer
be used to measure spasticity (Fleuren et al., 2010). However, in the clinical setting for this case series, the Ashworth scores were a
useful tool to measure muscle stiffness. The scores were recorded in the medical chart where they were extracted by one author who was not
involved in the care of the patients (MM). Data analysis was performed using Rstudio (version 0.99). Due to the small sample size, the
ordinal nature of the modified Ashworth scale, and to avoid violation of normality assumption, nonparametric tests were used for inference
for the three outcome measures. The Wilcoxon-Mann-Whitney test was used to assess changes in short-term and long-term outcomes post-
injection. Hommel's adjusted p-values were used to control for multiple hypothesis testing (Hommel, 1988). Spearman and Kendall tests were
used to assess the correlation between pre-injection measurements, dosage, age, gender, time since neurological injury, compliance with home
exercise program, short-term (T1–T0) and long-term (T3–T0) change in passive and active movement, and modified Ashworth scores. Mean and
standard deviation are reported for the continuous data (passive and active movement) and median and interquartile range, and proportion of
scores is reported for the ordinal data (modified Ashworth scores). To control for investigator bias in extraction of joint movement from
the videos, two raters independently measured the range of motion for each subject at every joint. Given that the joint movements
independently extracted by the two investigators were highly correlated (Pearson's correlation coefficient = 0.98, weighted Kappa
coefficient = 0.97), their average was used in the statistical analyses. To further control investigator bias and manage conflict of
interest, the findings were reviewed by an independent third-party with expertise in the field who is not associated with New York
University. No funding or drug was provided by any pharmaceutical company for this case series. The drug was obtained from the hospital
pharmacy for off-label clinical use. The corresponding author had full access to all the data in this study and had final responsibility for
the decision to submit for publication. All patients (n = 20) were assessed pre-injection (T0) and within 2 weeks post-injection (T1). The
mean time for post-injection assessments was 7 (SD 4) days. All patients tolerated the injections without immediate adverse effects. None of
the patients demonstrated a hypersensitivity reaction to the skin test. The most common adverse reaction was soreness at the injection sites
with onset within 24 h of the injection, lasting 24–48 h. The mean time for first post-injection follow up (T2) was 43 (SD 15) days, and it
was 96 (SD 39) days for the second post-injection follow up (T3). Three patients (#13, 17, and 19) did not present for follow up within the
T2 and T3 time frame. Patients #13 and 17 did not experience any adverse effects. Patient #19 experienced a delayed hypersensitivity
reaction characterized by a pruritic rash over the injected areas on post-injection day two, which subsided on treatment with oral
diphenhydramine and topical 1% hydrocortisone over 7 days. Four patients (#1, 2, 4, and 7) did not present for follow-up within the T3 time
frame. Patient #1 developed an unrelated wound on his back from a burn, patient #2 did not experience any adverse effects, patient #4 had an
unrelated fall with a humeral fracture, and patient #7 had an unrelated fall from a treadmill. The patients subsequently healed and were
followed in the clinic. Of note, 15 of the 20 patients (Table 1) voluntarily received subsequent treatment with hyaluronidase after the
period of follow-up specified in this report. The passive movement increased significantly at all joints at T1, and persisted at T2 and T3
for all joints, except for elbow flexion and forearm supination (Table 3). Note that the passive range of motion for elbow extension and
forearm supination for most of the patients was already within 10% of the maximum possible range at T0 (see Appendix A for figures of
individual subject data). For elbow extension the change in passive movement was negatively correlated with the pre-injection movement; the
greater the pre-injection elbow extension, the smaller its increase post-injection in both the short-term (r = − 0.86, p < 0.001) and long-
term (r = − 0.70, p = 0.025). However, for forearm supination the opposite was seen; the more restricted the forearm supination pre-
injection at T0, the smaller its increase post-injection in the short-term (r = 0.57, p = 0.03) (Table 4). Active movement showed more
variability across patients. For patients who could perform active movements, the mean extent of movement increased significantly at all
joints in the short-term, except for elbow extension, forearm pronation, and wrist extension (Table 3). However, over the long-term, the
increase was significant at all joints except wrist extension. The change in active movement was negatively correlated with the pre-
injection movement; the more restricted the pre-injection movement the greater its increase post-injection in the short-term for elbow
flexion (r = − 0.62, p = 0.004), and in the long-term for elbow flexion (r = − 0.58, p = 0.04), forearm pronation (r = − 0.65, p = 0.017),
and wrist flexion (r = − 0.68, p = 0.011) (Table 4). The median modified Ashworth scores decreased significantly across all the joint
movements from pre- to post-injection assessments (Table 3). The change in stiffness was negatively correlated with the degree of pre-
injection stiffness. The greater the pre-injection scores, the smaller the change for most movements (except shoulder flexion and wrist
extension) in the short-term, and for shoulder abduction (r = − 0.84, p < 0.001), elbow extension (r = − 0.85, p < 0.001), and forearm
supination (r = − 0.67, p = 0.013) in the long-term (Table 4). Table 5 shows that the modified Ashworth scores across all movements and
subjects reduced from a score of 2 (51%) and 3 (44%) at T0 to mostly 0 (48%) and 1 (30%) at T1. Further correlation analyses showed that
neither the short-term nor the long-term changes in passive or active movement, or modified Ashworth scores were significantly correlated
with patients' characteristics such as age, sex, side of hemiparesis, etiology, time since injury, prior treatment, absolute or weight-
adjusted dose of hyaluronidase, number of sites injected, or compliance with the exercise program. In this case series, we report that
intramuscular injections of the enzyme hyaluronidase increased passive and active joint movement and reduced muscle stiffness at upper limb
joints in patients with spasticity of cerebral origin. The effect of treatment remained over at least three months of follow-up. These
results suggest that accumulation of hyaluronan within muscles promotes the development of muscle stiffness in individuals with neurologic
injury, and that intramuscular delivery of hyaluronidase is a promising direct treatment for muscle stiffness. The injections were safe and
well tolerated, and without clinically significant adverse effects. Most importantly, the treatment did not produce weakness, which is a
common adverse effect with current treatment options for spasticity (Phadke et al., 2015). Side effects of muscle weakness and fatigue are
major impediments to recovery in patients with neurologic injury. The ability of hyaluronidase to reduce the resistance to movement without
producing weakness suggests that it can potentially facilitate recovery of function after neurologic injury. There is no direct evidence yet
that the change in mechanical properties of spastic muscles is due to the accumulation of hyaluronan. However, a study by Okita et al.
(2004) showed that immobilization of the rat ankle joint led to increased hyaluronan accumulation in the endomysium of the rat soleus muscle
compared to controls within 1 week, with concomitant decrease in sarcomere length. This was followed by subsequent change in the arrangement
of collagen fibrils and reduction in ankle range of motion. The authors suggested that increased hyaluronan in muscular tissue may induce
muscle stiffness. There is now emerging evidence that the accumulation of hyaluronan precedes fibrosis in several organs including the lung,
kidney, and liver (Bensadoun et al., 1996, Evanko et al., 2015, Jun et al., 1997, Hernnas et al., 1992, Halfon et al., 2005). Although the
mechanisms underlying changes in muscle due to mechanical immobilization and spastic paralysis may be different, immobility is a consequence
of spastic paralysis, and may trigger a cascade of events that leads to the accumulation of hyaluronan (Stecco et al., 2014). Furthermore,
there is evidence for the role of transforming growth factor-β (TGF-β), a profibrotic cytokine, in the regulation of hyaluronan production
(Heldin et al., 1989, Westergren-Thorsson et al., 1990, Dubaybo and Thet, 1990). Tissue injury, including cerebral injury, leads to
significant increase in TGF-β locally (Logan et al., 1992, Wang et al., 1995), where it may play a role in anti-inflammatory processes and
in brain tissue remodeling, as well as in the serum (Kaestner and Dimitriou, 2013, Shi et al., 2015), where it may trigger catabolic
signaling for muscle atrophy (Springer et al., 2014, Budasz-Rwiderska et al., 2005), stimulate the production of hyaluronan (Al'Qteishat et
al., 2006), and the migration (Samuel et al., 1993) and differentiation of myofibroblasts leading to fibrosis (Webber et al., 2009a, Webber
et al., 2009b). Moreover, catabolism of hyaluronan by hyaluronidases (Colombaro et al., 2015), and TGF-β antagonism (Midgley et al., 2015)
can reduce the levels of accumulated hyaluronan, potentially disrupting progression to fibrosis. Taken together, these findings support the
Hyaluronan Hypothesis of muscle stiffness and the treatment of muscle stiffness with hyaluronidase. Hyaluronidase is FDA-approved as an
agent that enhances tissue permeability, and it is currently indicated as an adjuvant to facilitate the absorption of drugs. The action of
hyaluronidase is short-lived; the dermal barrier to fluid diffusion is partly restored in 24 h and completely restored in 48 h following the
administration of hyaluronidase (Hechter, 1948). However, our results show noticeable and persistent reduction in muscle stiffness after
48 h; this may suggest the presence of hyaluronan cables (de la Motte et al., 2003, Lauer et al., 2013, Zhao et al., 1995) in muscle
stiffness that degrade slowly, and/or possible cross-reactivity with chondroitinase (Stern and Jedrzejas, 2006). Bacterial chondroitinase
degrades scar tissue and promotes neural plasticity after central nervous system damage in animal models (Fawcett, 2015). Hence longer-term
results with hyaluronidase injections may suggest interactions between non-neural muscle stiffness and neural plasticity. The efficacy of
treatment with hyaluronidase may be limited by the degree of baseline stiffness, fibrosis, and capacity for movement in specific directions.
Increased stiffness in inter-connected synergistic muscles may contribute to the flexor synergy pattern, and chronic abnormal posturing in
shoulder adduction, elbow flexion, and forearm pronation is frequently seen in patients with spastic hemiparesis. Some degree of fibrosis in
these muscles may limit the efficacy of treatment with hyaluronidase and explain the negative correlation between baseline and long-term
change scores on the Modified Ashworth scale for shoulder abduction, elbow extension and forearm supination, and the positive correlation
with change in short-term passive forearm supination. The negative correlation between baseline and change in passive elbow extension over
the short- and long-term suggest ceiling effects as most of the patients had almost full passive range at the elbow at baseline. The
negative correlations between baseline and change in active elbow flexion, forearm pronation, and wrist flexion suggest greater capacity for
movement in these directions. Furthermore, stretching a stiff muscle either passively or actively (for example, by contraction of the
antagonist), will restrain the movement due to increased tissue stiffness, and restrain the stretch due to increased reflex contractions as
a result of increased sensitivity of the muscle spindles embedded in stiff tissue. Increased reflex contractions may stimulate further
production of hyaluronan (Stecco et al., 2011) increasing connective tissue viscoelasticity and muscle stiffness. Since attempts to stretch
a muscle will invariable stretch multiple interconnected synergist and antagonist muscles (Stecco, 2015), reduction of stiffness following
restoration of intramuscular viscosity may not persist without concurrent treatment of several muscles. In the first few patients we
injected relatively few muscles, and subsequently increased the number of muscles injected as we learnt that injecting muscles both proximal
and distal to the primary stiff muscle, along the agonist and antagonist myofascial chains of limb movement, can give more favorable
results. An understanding of fascial planes and barriers to diffusion of hyaluronidase, and a comprehensive and accurate selection of
muscles for injection are therefore important aspects of the treatment. Use of tools such as ultrasonography or other imaging techniques to
assess the extent of fibrosis could improve patient and muscle selection for treatment. So far, hyaluronidase has only been used for the
treatment of muscle stiffness at our clinic in New York. However, there are no technical limitations that would prevent this procedure from
being performed in other centers with similar expertise. The drug is available for off-label use in the United States. A blinded randomized
placebo-controlled trial will be needed to control for a placebo response, the effects of confounding variables such as number and location
of injection sites, amount and quality of therapy, and investigator bias in recording and analyzing movement. This report does not address
the effect of repeated drug administration, although 15/20 patients did return for further injections. The results of this study warrant
replication by independent groups. Future studies should also directly investigate the role of hyaluronan and hyaluronidase in changing the
mechanical properties of spastic muscles using simultaneous joint angle, torque, and EMG measurements to tease apart the effects on
spasticity versus stiffness, and examine the efficacy of treatment with hyaluronidase on improvement in motor control, prevention of muscle
contracture, reduction in sensorimotor impairment, and increase in quality of life. In addition the role of cytokines such as TGF-β after
cerebral injury in mediating sarcopenia, accumulation of hyaluronan in muscle, and muscle contracture warrants further study. This case
series provides preliminary evidence for the safety and potential efficacy of hyaluronidase injections as a treatment for muscle stiffness
that may enhance functional recovery in the spastic upper limb, and may be applicable to other disorders characterized by muscle stiffness.
The following are the supplementary data related to this article.Video 1Case video of active elbow flexion-extension before and after
hyaluronidase injections.Video 1Video 2Case video of wrist and finger extension before and after hyaluronidase injections.Video 2Video 3Case
video of passive shoulder abduction before and after hyaluronidase injections.Video 3Video 4Case video of active forearm pronation and
supination before and after hyaluronidase injections.Video 4Video 5Case video of passive shoulder flexion before and after hyaluronidase
injections.Video 5Appendix AIndividual subject passive and active range of motion data extracted independently by two investigators.Image 1
Case video of active elbow flexion-extension before and after hyaluronidase injections. Case video of wrist and finger extension before and
after hyaluronidase injections. Case video of passive shoulder abduction before and after hyaluronidase injections. Case video of active
forearm pronation and supination before and after hyaluronidase injections. Case video of passive shoulder flexion before and after
hyaluronidase injections. Individual subject passive and active range of motion data extracted independently by two investigators. PR and AS
conceived of the idea. PR performed the injections, recorded data, interpreted the data, and wrote the report. MM extracted clinical data
from medical records and movement data from videos, and revised the report. YL performed statistical analysis, interpreted the data and
wrote the report. AS extracted movement data from videos and wrote the report. PR and AS report that New York University has filed a patent
(PCT/US 15/40767) on hyaluronidase for muscle stiffness. AS is the president of the Fascial Manipulation Association, a non-profit
organization whose purpose is to spread information about fascia and promote research on fascia. PR is a co-founder of Mirrored Motion
Works, Inc., a company that creates devices and services for rehabilitation, and serves as the Chairperson of YoungStroke, Inc., a non-
profit organization dedicated to advocacy for young adult stroke survivors. MM and YL declare no competing interests. The authors thank Dr.
Mary Cowman for discussions on the manuscript, and Dr. David Simpson for reviewing the methods including statistics, results, and discussion
as an unbiased independent third-party with expertise in the field, not associated with New York University. Muscles injected with Human
Recombinant Hyaluronidase. Synergistically acting muscles contributing to the stiffness along the myofascial chain of the upper limb were
selected for injection with Hylauronidase mixed with normal saline in a 1:1 ratio. Characteristics of patients. Patients that did not
receive subsequent hyaluronidase injections. Home exercise program. All patients were prescribed a daily home-exercise program and
compliance was documented in the medical chart. They were asked to hold a pipe (or stick), approximately shoulder width in length, with both
hands and perform the movements listed. Here the unaffected arm guides and facilitates the movements of the affected arm. Mean (SD) passive
and active movement and median (IQR) modified Ashworth score at each time point and significance of change. T0 = pre-injection; T1 = within
2 weeks post-injection; T2 = within 6–8 weeks post-injection; T3 = within 3–5 months post-injection. Correlation between baseline and change
scores. Spearman's correlation for passive and active movement and modified Ashworth score between pre-injection baseline (T0) and short-
term change (T1–T0), and baseline and long-term change (T3–T0). Change in distribution of modified Ashworth scale (MAS) scores over time.
T0 = pre-injection; T1 = within 2 weeks post-injection; T2 = within 6–8 weeks post-injection; T3 = within 3–5 months post-injection.
