Pyogenic arthritis of native joints due to Bacteroides fragilis seems to be an infrequent disease. We analyzed the cases diagnosed in a
tertiary hospital during a 22-year period and reviewed the literature to summarize the experience with this infectious entity. In our
institution, of 308 patients with pyogenic arthritis of native joints, B fragilis was the causative organism in 2 (0.6%) cases. A MEDLINE
search (1981–2015) identified 19 additional cases. Of the 21 patients available for review (13 men and 8 women, with a mean age, of
54.4 ± 17 years), 19 (90%) presented a systemic predisposing factor for infection; the most common associated illness was rheumatoid
arthritis (8 patients). Bacteremia was documented in 65% (13/20) of cases. In 5 patients (24%), 1 or more concomitant infectious process was
found. Metronidazole was the most frequently used antibiotic. Surgical drainage was performed in 11 cases (52%). The overall mortality rate
was 5%. Pyogenic arthritis of native joints due to B fragilis is an infrequent disease that mainly affects elderly patients with underlying
medical illnesses and in whom bacteremia and the presence of a concomitant infectious process are frequent conditions. Pyogenic arthritis
presents 2 different scenarios depending on whether the infection compromises prosthetic or native joints. The 2 processes have important
distinctive clinical and microbiological features and require different approaches. Pyogenic arthritis of native joints is a potentially
life-threatening disease that can lead to rapid joint destruction and irreversible loss of function. It remains a serious medical emergency
with high morbidity and mortality. A large number of gram-positive and gram-negative bacteria have been identified as causative agents.
Overall, Stahylococcus aureus has been the most commonly isolated microorganism, accounting for more than 50% of reported cases;
streptococci cause almost 25% of cases and gram-negative bacilli around 10% to 15%. Anaerobic etiological agents are extremely rare; in a
recent review of 3-decade trends in the distribution of organisms causing septic arthritis in native joints, anaerobic bacteria caused only
2 of the 374 cases reported. Bacteroides fragilis is an obligate anaerobe, a gram-negative rod that forms a part of the normal flora of the
oral cavity, the skin, and the genitourinary and gastrointestinal tract. Like other microorganisms of the genre Fusobacterium,
Porphyromonas, Prevotella, and Peptostreptococcus it is a nonspore forming bacteria. B fragilis can become an opportunistic pathogen. In
fact, it is the most commonly isolated organism in anaerobic infections and responsible for a wide spectrum of clinical manifestations. The
commonest entities are primary bacteremia, periodontal disease, skin and soft tissue infections, and intra-abdominal abscesses. Other
relevant but less frequent conditions are respiratory tract infections, endocarditis, pericarditis, meningitis, and osteoarticular
infections. The prevalence of B fragilis arthritis of native joints has not been established, but it seems to be an extremely rare disease.
At the modern era, Ziment et al performed the first detailed description of a case in 1969. Additionally, 4 new cases were reported in the
following decade, demonstrating the capacity of this organism to cause pyogenic arthritis. In 1990, Rosenkranz et al presented their
experience, reviewed the literature, and established the state of the art about this topic. In the current study, we present the cases of
pyogenic arthritis of native joints due to B fragilis observed at our institution over 2 decades, and review the available literature to
summarize the experience with this infectious entity and to clarify, in the light of the current knowledge, certain clinical, and
therapeutic issues of the disease. We searched the database of our hospital (a 700-bed tertiary care teaching institution in Barcelona that
does not treat pediatric, obstetric, or burn patients) for subjects with infectious arthritis admitted from January 1992 to December 2013.
For the present study, we excluded: patients with prosthetic joint infection, patients with postoperative arthritis (patients who had
undergone joint surgery or arthroscopy in the year before diagnosis), patients with arthritis secondary to traumatic or spontaneous skin or
soft tissue ulcers (e.g., diabetic foot), and patients with mycobacterial, brucellar, or fungal arthritis. Three hundred eight patients [203
male (66%), 105 (34%) female; mean age: 57.7 ± 16.3 years] with pyogenic arthritis of native joints were identified. All cases were
microbiologically proven. According to our protocol, joint fluid samples are sent directly to the laboratory, processed in liquid
(thioglicolate) and solid media (5% sheep blood, chocolate, and MacConkey agar), and incubated for at least 7 days. Blood samples are
cultured following standard recommendations in bottles of BacT (Bactec NR-860-system, Johnson Laboratories, Towson, MD) with both aerobic
and anaerobic media. Microorganisms and their antibiotic susceptibility are identified using the MicroScan system (Dad Behring, West
Sacramento, CA). Two patients with B fragilis arthritis were observed at our center during the assessment period. Previously published cases
of B fragilis pyogenic arthritis of native joints were identified using a computerized search of the MEDLINE (National Library of Medicine,
Bethseda, MD) database from January 1981 to December 2015. The key words used were “Bacteroides fragilis” and “arthritis.” Only reports in
English, French, and Spanish were considered; the references studies obtained were then examined to identify additional reports. Only cases
that were sufficiently detailed to be analyzed individually were included. We excluded: patients under the age of 18, cases of prosthetic
joint infection; and cases of postoperative arthritis. A case of polymicrobial arthritis involving B fragilis was not included. In
accordance with the guidelines of our institutional ethics committee, formal approval for this study was not required. Informed consent was
not obtained from the patients, but their clinical records and information were anonymized before analysis. Nineteen cases of pyogenic
arthritis of native joints due to B fragilis were identified in the literature. Thus, including the 2 patients observed at our center during
the study period, 21 cases were available for review (Table 1 ). Demographic, clinical, and laboratory findings, treatment and outcome in 21
cases of pyogenic arthritis of native joints due to Bacteroides fragilis. Demographic, clinical, and laboratory findings, treatment and
outcome in 21 cases of pyogenic arthritis of native joints due to Bacteroides fragilis. Demographic, clinical, and laboratory findings,
treatment and outcome in 21 cases of pyogenic arthritis of native joints due to Bacteroides fragilis. Of these 21 patients, 13 (62 %) were
men and 8 (38 %) women, with ages ranging from 19 to 78 years (54.4 ± 17 years). Nine patients (43%) were over 60 years of age. Nineteen
patients (90%) presented a systemic predisposing factor for infection. The most common associated illness was rheumatoid arthritis (8
patients). Other relevant but more infrequent conditions were inflammatory diseases (systemic lupus erythematosus, mixed connective tissue
disease, and psoriatic arthritis, 1 case each) and cancer (1 case of gastric adenocarcinoma with bone metastases and 1 case of non-Hodgkin
lymphoma). Fifteen percent (3/20) of patients did not present with fever before diagnosis. Fifteen patients (71%) presented monoarthritis.
The knee was the most frequently compromised joint (12 patients). The erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) was above 50 mm/h in all cases in
whom this datum was reported. Mean ESR was 99.8 ± 30.7 (range: 52–128). In 72% of patients (10/14) the white blood cell count (WBC) was
above 11 × 109/L; the mean WBC was 13.2 ± 5.1 × 109/L (range, 5.5–24.6). Synovial fluid cultures gave positive results in all cases in whom
they were performed (20/21). Blood cultures gave positive results in the 65% of cases (13/20). Five patients (24%) presented 1 or more
concomitant infectious processes due to the same microorganism. The most frequent was pyomiositis (3 patients); other entities were uterine
infection, abscess after tracheostomy, and surgical wound infection. Initial empirical therapy varied among patients, whereas metronidazole
was the most used antibiotic after bacterial identification. As part of the standard management, some patients underwent daily percutaneous
articular drainage. Surgical debridement was performed in 11 (52%) patients. One patient (5%) presented relapse and 1 (5%) died. Although
Pasteur in one of his earliest publications described obligatory anaerobic bacteria, anaerobic infection other than that caused by certain
species of clostridia received relatively little attention over the following 100 years. In 1974, Gorbach and Bartlett reviewed the
available literature on pyogenic processes associated with anaerobic organisms of the normal flora and provided your expertise. These
authors stated that anaerobic bacteria are rarely encountered in pyogenic arthritis. It is established that anaerobic arthritis mainly
affects patients undergoing surgical treatment for traumatic injuries or elective musculoskeletal surgery (arthroplasty or other orthopedic
devices); when it occurs, B fragilis is the principal causative microorganism. However, information on anaerobic arthritis of native joints
is very scarce. In the present study, we reviewed all cases of B fragilis pyogenic arthritis of native joints published in the literature
since 1981 and included 2 patients attended at our hospital. The summarized experience, comprising 21 cases, is, by far, the largest series
on this infectious disease. Data from our institution confirm that B fragilis is an exceptional causative agent of pyogenic arthritis of
native joints, representing only 0.6% of all diagnosed cases. The figure obtained for overall anaerobic infection is similar to than
observed in the series of adult patients with infectious arthritis published in the literature over the last decade, with the exception of
the series of Lim et al who reported an high frequency of patients with prosthetic joint infection (21%). Nevertheless, it is possible that
the failure to culture under anaerobic conditions will underestimate the real importance of B fragilis as a causative agent. Our review
demonstrates that B fragilis arthritis mainly appears in elderly patients. A predominance among males was also noted as also occurs in the
general series of pyogenic arthritis. The presence of concomitant chronic debilitating disease in the vast majority of patients (90%)
indicates the opportunistic nature of the microorganism. Ischemic heart disease, sickle cell disease, malignancy, and above all rheumatoid
arthritis (40%) were the main underlying processes. The association between B fragilis pyogenic arthritis and rheumatoid arthritis has been
previously reported and should be particularly emphasized according to the data included in the present revision. Overall, patients with
rheumatoid arthritis are particularly susceptible to pyogenic arthritis. The estimated incidence of this complication ranges from 0.3% to
3%.S aureus is the main etiological agent, causing more than 70% of cases. The frequency of anaerobic arthritis is low, though it seems
higher than observed in the general population. In the classical review of Gardner and Weisman, anaerobes accounted for 3% of cases (6/213)
observed between 1946 and 1987. In our experience, anaerobic bacteria were the causative agents of 6% of cases (2/35) attended between 1981
and 2013. The mechanisms responsible for the increased vulnerability to joint infection have not been precisely identified, but skin
defects, previous articular damage, poor clearance of bacteria from the joint, and acquired phagocytic defects secondary to drugs or disease
have been proposed. In the particular case of B fragilis additionally is important to consider the relevant role of its capsula as a
virulent factor, promoting abscess formation by inhibiting opsonophagocytosis. Thus, the damaged joint along with the systemic immunologic
impairment may be the key factors in the development of arthritis by B fragilis in patients with rheumatoid arthritis. The percentage of
patients who remained afebrile before diagnosis was low, but noticeable. These cases stress the importance of maintaining a high index of
suspicion of infection when 1 joint (or more) suddenly becomes inflamed, especially in immunocompromised hosts. The infection involved more
than 1 joint in almost 30% of cases, whereas the classically reported frequency of polyarthritis is 15%. As in the general series of
pyogenic arthritis, the knee was the most commonly affected joint. The high percentage of cases with positive blood cultures should also be
noted; bacteremia was detected in 65% of the cases in whom blood culture results were available. Most cases of B fragilis arthritis have
been attributed to hematogenous spread from a distant infected focus, usually intra-abdominal. However, on occasions this focus has not been
identified despite a search strategy that includes colonoscopy and computerized tomography of the abdomen. In our review, a quarter of
patients present a concomitant infectious process, mainly pyomiositis as a result of contiguous spread of the infection. This circumstance
must be borne in mind since the symptoms and signs of pyogenic arthritis and pyomiositis are similar and one of them may be missed or
incompletely treated. Anaerobic and aerobic arthritis require the same treatment, comprising temporary immobilization, drainage of the
joint, and adequate antibiotic therapy. Some authors favor hyperbaric oxygen therapy as an adjunctive treatment in the management of the
patients if the preservation or restoration of the blood supply in the area involved is not possible. Prompt complete removal of infected
synovial fluid is necessary to preserve good joint function and to control the infection. This aids bacterial clearance from synovial fluid
and tissues, rapidly decreases the intra-articular pressure, reduces cartilage damage, and increases the efficacy of antimicrobial therapy.
No large prospective comparative studies are available, and the choice of drainage (repeated closed needle aspiration or surgical drainage)
remains controversial. Few data are available on the antibiotic therapy of arthritis due to B fragilis and no recommendations have been
clearly established. For treatment of anaerobic bacterial infections, clindamycin has classically considered the gold standard. However, B
fragilis antibiotic resistance to clindamycin has increased over the years, reaching 41.8% in Mediterranean countries and now, empirical
therapy by this antibiotic should be discouraged. Data from this review show that initial empirical therapy varied among patients, while
metronidazole was the most used antibiotic after bacterial identification. While β-lactam antibiotics resistant to β-lactamases may be
considered good alternative therapy if an appropriate articular drainage is warranted, metronidazole provides a better theoretical profile
because its reported bactericidal activity in the purulent milieu of the arthritis. Relapse seems to be rare in B fragilis arthritis, being
observed in only 1 of the 21 cases analyzed. The mortality rate (5%) was consistent with recently published reports of native pyogenic
arthritis. Underlying medical processes and bacteremia are the main determinants of death in patients with infectious arthritis. The
difficulty of modifying these variables means that it is hard to reduce mortality rates despite advances in the medical and surgical
management of these patients. In summary, B fragilis is an infrequent causative agent of pyogenic arthritis of native joints. Joint disease
due to this microorganism mainly affects aged patients with underlying medical illnesses, in whom bacteremia and the presence of a
concomitant infectious process are frequent conditions. Relapse seems to be uncommon and the mortality rates are consistent with those
reported in native pyogenic arthritis. The authors have no conflicts of interest to disclose.
