Foreign body ingestion is seen quite frequently in clinical practice, intestinal perforation due to this is rare. The foreign body often
mimics another cause of acute abdomen and requires an emergency surgical intervention. The majority of patients do not recall ingesting
sharp foreign bodies. We report an interesting case of a fifty five year-old man who presented with pain in the right iliac fossa with
localised tenderness which was clinically diagnosed as acute appendicitis. During the operation, the presence of purulent collection and the
inflamed bowel with flakes raised suspicion of bowel perforation. The assessment of the proximal small bowel revealed two small perforations
in the jejunum. A hard, bony and sharp object was extracted and the perforations were closed. Post-operative recovery was uneventful.
Detailed food history was taken following the recovery of the patient from surgery. It revealed the history ingestion of home prepared
buffalo meat. The extracted object was identified as ‘buffalo bone’ by the patient and the care taker of the patient. The jejunum was
perforated by the ingested buffalo bone causing local peritonitis in right iliac fossa. Intestinal perforation by ingested foreign bodies
should be suspected in acute abdomen. It requires a high degree of suspicion and awareness on the part of the clinician. The online version
of this article (doi:10.1186/s13104-016-2127-y) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users. The majority of
ingested foreign bodies (IFB) are excreted from the digestive tract without any complications or morbidity; however, occasionally they may
lead to serious clinical problems, such as obstruction, perforation or bleeding . Although IFB are quite common problem in children, they
are infrequently encountered in adults but are seen in elderly people wearing dentures, alcoholics and/or patients with learning
difficulties . IFB, such as chicken bones, fish bones, toothpicks and dentures require surgical intervention in 5 % of cases. Patients are
not usually aware of the IFB which is usually detected either during laparotomy or at the time of pathological examination of the surgical
specimen . Less than 1 % of IFB, especially large, sharp and/or pointed objects, cause bowel perforation. Perforation usually occurs at the
narrowest part of the bowel, either at the ileocecal valve or at the rectosigmoid junction . Sharp fish bone causing perforation in the
duodenum has been reported . This case report highlights the importance of detailed history taking for food ingestion in a case presenting
with symptoms of acute appendicitis where the pain characteristics are not very typical of appendicitis. A fifty five year-old man presented
to the emergency room (ER) with a localized pain at the right iliac fossa. There were no histories of nausea, vomiting or any other
complaints associated with the pain. History taking revealed that the pain was colicky in nature around the epigastric region when it
started 3 days ago. The pain increased gradually by the next day, which eventually localized at the right iliac fossa before the case
presented to our ER. The pain at the right iliac fossa was a continuous type which was aggravated by any kind of movement and was relieved
by rest. The patient did not give any past history of medical or surgical problems. There were no known drug allergies or use of any
medications. He was afebrile. Abdominal examination revealed localised tenderness and with guarding in the right iliac fossa. The baseline
work up was normal. The appendix was not visualized on ultrasonogram but revealed minimal fluid collection in the right iliac fossa. A
diagnosis of acute appendicitis was done and a plan for emergency appendectomy was made. During operation, Gridiron incision was made to
visualize the appendix, which was mildly inflamed. On cut section, the mucosa was found to be inflamed and the presence of a faecolith was
noted. Following appendectomy, the presence of inflamed bowel with food flakes and purulent collection raised suspicion of intestinal
perforation. We decided to explore the entire bowel. The incision was converted to Rutherford Morrison incision. Bowel examination revealed
two small jejunal perforations around 2 mm size in the antimesenteric border, approximately 250 cm proximal to ileocaecal junction. On
palpation of the adjacent bowel, a hard, bony and sharp object was felt. This object was removed through the perforation site. The
perforations were repaired in two layers with 3/0 polygalactin and 3/0 silk sutures. A pelvic drain was placed, after which the abdomen was
closed in layers. Postoperative recovery was uneventful. Histopathology report of the appendix revealed eosinophils, which indicated
receding appendicitis. The extracted sharp and bony foreign body was discussed among the surgical team as a sharp piece of animal bone.
After patient recovery, both the patient and caretaker were interviewed in detail about the food history before the pain started. The
history revealed the ingestion of home cooked buffalo meat with alcohol in the evening by the patient. The patient usually consumed buffalo
meat with alcohol in the evenings. The object was confirmed as a ‘buffalo bone’ by both the patient and the caretaker (Figs. 1, 2).Fig. 1The
foreign body: a buffalo boneFig. 2Two tiny jejunal perforations (indicated by the tip of the arrows) The foreign body: a buffalo bone Two
tiny jejunal perforations (indicated by the tip of the arrows) The diagnosis of the patient based on the history, clinical examination and
laboratory investigation initially pointed towards acute appendicitis. The symptoms were not typical only of acute appendicitis; however,
due to lack of enough evidence, other differential diagnosis could not be considered immediately. Retrospectively, the pain can be discussed
to be caused primarily by the progression of the perforation. The released intestinal contents may have collected in the right iliac fossa.
This could have inflamed the appendix causing the symptoms that mimic appendicitis. A variety of foreign bodies such as dentures,
toothpicks, chicken or fish bone and cocktail sticks have been implicated in the pathogenesis of gastrointestinal perforation . Perforations
are common in elderly individuals (who wear dentures), alcoholics, children and mentally challenged individuals. Less than 1 % of ingested
foreign bodies perforate the bowel, and the greatest risk is with large, sharp or pointed objects. The foreign bodies usually pass through
the esophagus without any complications, there is an increased risk for bowel perforations, bowel obstruction and other complications of
complications . Most common site for intestinal perforation is terminal ileum and rectosigmoid region . In our patient perforation was at
jejunum. The patient did not provide a history of ingestion of a foreign body, his admission to the hospital was due to a severe lower
abdominal pain and we did not observe subdiaphragatic free air on a radiological evaluation. Patients often do not recall ingesting foreign
body. The foreign body is found either during investigations or during surgery. Patients may present with abdominal pain, nausea, vomiting,
fever, haematochezia or melena. Foreign-body perforation of the bowel presents as acute abdominal emergency mimicking acute appendicitis,
diverticulitis or perforated peptic ulcer . Free air is seen in 15.9 % of gastrointestinal perforations in the subdiaphragmatic region . The
foreign material perforates the intestinal wall and an inflammation occurs in this region with a granulation tissue covering intestinal wall
and omentum with fibrin material. This can explain the low rate of subdiaphragmatic free air in a direct radiography . Hard triangular
plastic material was recovered during exploration laparotomy in jejunum perforation . In a case of 3-months history of abdominal pain, fever
and leucocytosis, an explorative laparotomy revealed fish bone. The case had jejunal perforation due to the fish bone . A fish bone
perforation mimicking acute appendicitis is also reported . While fish bones are sharp and perforations are reported [14, 15], the case
presented here had two small jejunal perforations due to a buffalo bone. He presented with symptoms of acute appendicitis. Perforations were
repaired primarily (Additional file 1). Intestinal perforation by ingested foreign bodies should be suspected in acute abdomen. A detailed
food history may be required for cases presenting with symptoms of acute appendicitis that do not have a typical pain history of
appendicitis. It requires a high degree of suspicion and awareness on the part of the clinician. 10.1186/s13104-016-2127-y Care case report
timeline. 10.1186/s13104-016-2127-y Care case report timeline. ingested foreign bodies emergency room AKY, SG, GM, were involved in managing
the case at the Emergency Ward. KBD, BMB and SA performed surgery. AKY, GM, KBD, SG, BMB and SA contributed to the conception of the case
report. Preliminary report was prepared by AKY, KBD and SA. The draft was revised and inputs were given by all authors. Literature review
was performed by AKY, GM and SA. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. The authors would like to acknowledge the contribution
from Dr. Shyam Sundar Budhathoki, Assistant Professor, School of Public Health and Community Medicine, B.P. Koirala Institute of Health
Sciences for contributing during the manuscript preparation and proof reading the manuscript draft. The authors declare that they have no
competing interests. All available data are included within the manuscript. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for
publication of this Case report and any accompanying images.
