Study Design Data Collection Statistical Analysis Data Interpretation Manuscript Preparation Literature Search Funds Collection We present
the case of a 69-year-old female patient with giant aortic aneurysm who underwent previously multiple cardiac surgeries or interventions.
Ross procedure was performed in 2006 due to aortic valve regurgitation and aneurysm of the ascending aorta. In 2010 the patient was re-
admitted for pulmonary valve insufficiency and a transcatheter pulmonary valve was implanted. Recently, the patient presented with an aortic
arch aneurysm, maximum diameter 78 mm, which was treated by a hybrid approach, implanting a frozen elephant trunk and a covered stent graft.
The current case report demonstrates a suitable hybrid option for an extremely demanding procedure by multiple previous cardiac procedures.
Aneurysms of the entire thoracic aorta are severe diseases due to high risk of dissection, rupture, and death . Necessary surgery can be
extensive and challenging, especially if the patient underwent previously multiple cardiac surgeries . A 69-year-old female patient
presented with a newly found aneurysm of the thoracic aorta, maximum 78 mm diameter, in the zone of the aortic arch (Figure 1A). The patient
underwent Ross procedure and replacement of the ascending aorta in 2006. In 2010 pulmonary valve replacement was performed due to pulmonary
insufficiency. In 2015 the patient was re-admitted with the above findings and, after clarifying therapeutic options, a hybrid approach was
planned to replace the aortic arch and the descending aorta. Hypothermic cardiopulmonary bypass was implemented by cannulation of the right
axillary artery and the femoral vein to open the chest because the aneurysm was directly behind the sternum. After exposing the aneurysm,
circulatory arrest with cerebral perfusion was started. In the course of the procedure, due to heavy adhesions of the lung to the heart, the
aneurysm and the chest wall had to be loosened. The aortic arch was excised and a Thoraflex™ Hybrid (Vascutek, Hamburg, Germany) prosthesis
was inserted distal of the left subclavian artery. After reconnection of the detached arteries, circulation was re-induced after 89 minutes.
Cardiopulmonary bypass was stopped after 326 minutes. Due to respiratory failure, extracorporeal membrane oxygenation was necessary to
support lung function for the following 5 days. At 12 days after the operation, a Valiant™ thoracic stent graft (Medtronic, Berlin, Germany)
was implanted interventionally in the descending aorta (Figure 1B). The postoperative course was complicated, including temporary renal
failure (requiring dialysis), pneumonia, long-term ventilation (including tracheotomy), peripheral embolization due to heparin-induced
thrombocytopenia, and critical-illness polyneuropathy/myopathy. However, due to optimal interdisciplinary teamwork, the patient was
discharged to a rehabilitation facility on the 40th postoperative day and went home 2 months later completely recovered. The replacement of
the aortic is an extensive operation with operative mortality between 2.5% and 10% and stroke rates between 5.0% and 11.8% . Secondary
procedures are usually more complex due to aging and adhesions involving the whole operative area . Therefore, in these patients the
perioperative risk rises . The established method is either the 1-stage treatment using the clamshell incision, or the 2-stage treatment by
a secondary lateral thoracotomy. The combined open surgical and endovascular approach for the treatment of aortic arch aneurysms has emerged
as a safe treatment with good midterm results . This so-called frozen elephant trunk technique reduces surgical trauma, as well as reducing
the duration of cardiopulmonary bypass, circulatory arrest, and the whole procedure . Additionally, a survival advantage of this hybrid
technique compared to the surgical method has already been shown . In the presented case, the 2-stage hybrid procedure was performed despite
the high-risk profile of the patient, leading to a satisfactory operative result. Alternative treatment options like the 1-stage and 2-stage
approach cause a higher operative risk and would, in retrospect, not have been an option in this patient due to the heavy adhesions of the
aneurysm and the complete operative situs. Nonetheless, this case demonstrates that the postoperative course can still be complicated and
demanding. In conclusion, hybrid surgery can be an appropriate option to reduce surgical trauma in high-risk patients with aortic aneurysms
and multiple previous cardiac procedures. Presented at the AATS Aortic Symposium 2016 in New York, NY, U.S.A. Source of support:
Departmental sources Conflicts of interest The authors declare no conflicts of interest. (A) 3D and 2D reconstruction of the aneurysm
preoperatively. (B) 3D and 2D reconstruction after the completed procedure.
