Empathy among medical practitioners has been shown to affect patient care and outcomes. Factors such as stress and depression are known to
have a negative impact on medical student empathy. Approaches such as mindfulness, meditation, and other mind–body techniques can enhance
empathy and reverse burnout symptoms. In the present study, we evaluated impact of Mind Body Medicine (MBM) course on perceived stress and
empathy on first-year medical students. Thirteen first-year medical students in total self-selected into MBM (experimental) and seven non-
MBM (control) groups completed a prospective, pre- and post-test analysis, using the Jefferson Scale of Physician Empathy – Students
(JSPE-S), Perceived Stress Scale (PSS), and Personal Health Questionnaire (PHQ) to evaluate empathy, stress, and depression, respectively.
Our results showed an increase in stress, as well as a decrease in empathy, in both MBM and non-MBM groups throughout the course of the
study. Our study demonstrated that the inverse relationship increased stress and decreased empathy among first-year medical students and
participation in the MBM course did not attenuate the changes. However, a statistically significant rise in the depression score in the non-
MBM group was not observed in the MBM group. A well-developed patient–physician relationship has been shown to improve patient health
outcomes and compliance (1, 2). Being empathic is one of the many factors contributing to enhancing the patient–physician relationship (3).
In the clinical setting, empathy is defined as the ability to feel the patient experience to form better understanding (4). Empathy is
beneficial to the provider as well, as it corresponds to better job satisfaction as well as improved clinical practice (1, 2, 4). Studies
have shown that feelings of stress and depression have an inverse relationship with empathy among health care professionals and lead to
lower quality of care and an increase in medical errors (5–7). It is well known that medical students have high rates of stress and
depression (8–14) and show decreases in empathy during training (1, 5, 15–18). Furthermore, a statistically significant percentage of
medical students exhibit burnout and show increased signs of depression during medical school (1, 19). To address these challenges, many
medical schools are developing curricular interventions to better prepare medical students for the rigors of the profession. With these
goals in mind, the Mind Body Medicine (MBM) program at Georgetown University School of Medicine offers a 11-week elective course to first-
year medical students involving experiential introduction to practices such as meditation, guided imagery, and journal writing within small
group interactions (19). The primary objective is to introduce students to MBM skills that foster self-awareness and help them better cope
with stress. Each group of 10 students is facilitated by two trained faculty members. The program was started by a grant provided by
Georgetown University School of Medicine in 2001 and a larger award from the National Institutes of Health (11). Previous studies of the MBM
course at Georgetown University have reported that participants had reduced perceived levels of stress and physiologic stress biomarkers and
increased levels of empathy (9, 11–14). In the present study, we used different instruments to assess whether stress and depression in
medical students would be affected by participation in the MBM course. This was a prospective, pre- and post-test quasi-experimental study.
The study population consisted of medical students in the class of 2018 who received the Jefferson Scale of Physician Empathy – Students
(JSPE-S), the Perceived Stress Scale (PSS), and Personal Health Questionnaire (PHQ). Our inclusion criteria were first-year medical students
enrolled in the class of 2018. We opted to use the JSPE-S (2, 15, 19) which is a validated instrument widely used in medical students. The
JSPE was specifically designed for medical students (the S-version) in context of medical education and patient care (15). The PSS is a
14-item questionnaire answered on a five-point frequency scale. The PSS serves to measure each individual's perceived frequency of stress
and has been widely used (11–13). The verified measure for depression is the PHQ. The PHQ is a nine-item questionnaire that focuses on
symptoms of depression that the subject may experience. The total score is out of 27 points, and a clinical diagnosis of depression may be
made if the subject answers 2 or 3 for 5 or more symptoms (20, 21). Copies of the JSPE were obtained with permission from the Center for
Research in Medical Education and Health Care at Jefferson University. The PHQ and PSS are available in the public domain. Survey
participants were given unique identifiers. Demographics collected were age, gender, and race/ethnicity. The above demographics were
collected prior to starting the MBM course. First-year medical students not participating in MBM course served as controls, while first-year
medical students participating in MBM course served as the experimental group. After obtaining IRB approval, the JSPE-S, PHQ, and PSS were
administered to first-year medical students at the beginning of their fall semester of the first year. This allowed us to measure baseline
levels of stress, depression, and empathy and to evaluate any confounding variables. The students self-selected for the MBM course program,
which consisted of approximately 60–80 students out of a class of approximately 180 students. Toward the end of the first year, the
instruments were administered once again. At the beginning of their fall semester (August 2014), 122 first-year medical students completed
the surveys; however, only 27 completed the post-test surveys upon conclusion of their first year (May 2015). The data were matched with
identifiers and results that did not include both a pre- and post-test were not included. Ultimately, there were 20 individuals in this
dataset. Of those, 7 were not enrolled in the MBM course and 13 were. We conducted Fisher's exact test to test whether enrollment in the MBM
course was independent of the demographic characteristics. We concluded that enrollment in the MBM course was in fact independent of gender,
ethnicity, race, marital status, and religion, respectively (p-values >0.05). Using the Kolmogorov–Smirnoff test, a non-normal distribution
(p-values<0.05) was observed. Therefore, a Wilcoxon Signed Rank test was used to test for pre–post differences within the MBM and non-MBM
groups. The Wilcoxon Rank Sum test was used to make between-group comparisons at baseline and after completion of the course. As shown in
Fig. 1, there was a statistically significant increase in PSS scores between the two time points in both groups. There were no statistically
significant differences in either baseline or post-test stress scores between the two groups (p>0.05) (Fig. 1). Data regarding empathy are
shown in Fig. 2. Both the control group and students who enrolled in the MBM course showed a statistically significant decrease in empathy
(p<0.05). Here too, there was no significant difference in JSPE-S values between the two groups (p>0.05) either in baseline or post-test
scores (Fig. 2). Scores on the Perceived Stress Scale (PSS) in first-year medical students. Scores on the Jefferson Scale of Physician
Empathy-Student (JSPE-S) in first-year medical students. With regard to the PHQ survey for depression (Fig. 3), there was a statistically
significant increase in median values for depression in the control group (p<0.05), which was not seen in the students who took the MBM
course. Scores on the Personal Health Questionnaire in first-year medical students. Findings from this pilot study demonstrate that both
control and MBM groups had statistically significant increases in stress levels during the course of the first year of medical school. It
can be noted that the control, non-MBM group had PSS levels elevated to ‘high stress’ levels (>20), while the MBM group remained elevated
but did not exceed that threshold considered ‘high stress’. However, the differences between the two post-tests were not statistically
significant. Nevertheless, perceived stress levels were elevated among medical students regardless of participation in MBM. The results
reinforce the notion of an inverse relationship between increased stress and decreased empathy during medical training. We found that while
stress increased significantly between pre- and post-test analysis for both MBM and non-MBM groups, empathy decreased significantly in the
same time period for both groups (7). Participation in the MBM course did not appear to alter the course of elevation in perceived stress
and reduction in empathy. However, a difference was noted in the median depression scores. In the control group (non-MBM), median depression
scores rose significantly, but did not change in the MBM group, suggesting a potential protective effect of an MBM course. It should be
noted, however, that while the change was statistically significant, the PHQ scores in both groups were not in range of clinical depression.
The purpose of our study was to determine if a classroom intervention in the form of an MBM course might have an impact on stress,
depression, and empathy. While we hypothesized that participation in the course might enable students to manage their stress better and
boost their empathy, the findings of the small study failed to demonstrate those outcomes, perhaps related to the small sample size. A major
limitation of the study was the low rate of subject response. As a result of this, we were only able to analyze data on 20 subjects. As
such, our study's power was 0.255 (after accounting for multiple comparisons). A further study with a higher sample size is hence needed to
establish a statistical effect. Other limitations include non-uniformity of MBM courses offered throughout the country, making the results
of the MBM course conducted at Georgetown University difficult to generalize to courses offered throughout the country. Perhaps MBM courses
at Georgetown University are particularly adept to protective effects of depression and less impactful on stress and depression. Clearly,
this pilot needs to be repeated with a larger sample over multiple years. Indeed, this study was conducted over the course of 1 year – the
first year of medical school. It is important to follow students over the course of the 4-year curriculum and ideally compare students and
programs at different institutions. Our study examined the impact of participation in an MBM course at Georgetown University School of
Medicine on empathy, stress, and depression. The findings confirm that perceived stress increases and empathy declines during the first year
of medical school. This inverse relationship was not altered by the MBM course participation. We did find that depression scores went up
significantly in the control group but not in students who participated in the MBM course. While this pilot study was limited in scope, it
does provide important information and will serve to provide baseline data for future studies examining the effects of MBM interventions in
medical students. The authors thank Dr. Peggy Weissinger EdD MBA, Jamie Padmore, Dr. Michael Plankey PhD for guidance, advice, and editorial
support; Dr. Mary Ann Dutton PhD for collaboration of data; the Center for Research in Medical Education and Health Care for providing the
JSPE-S for the study; and the Center for Innovation and Leadership in Education for financial support. The authors have not received any
funding or benefits from industry or elsewhere to conduct this study.
