To report a minimally invasive paraspinal approach in the treatment of a case of spontaneous spinal epidural hematoma (SSEH). We
additionally aim to review the relevant literature to enhance our knowledge of this disease. SSEH is an uncommon but potentially
catastrophic disease. Currently, most appropriate management is emergence decompression laminectomy and hematoma evacuation. An 81-year-old
woman was admitted to the neurology department with a chief complaint of bilateral numbness and weakness of the lower limbs and difficulty
walking for 4 days with progressive weakness developed over the following 3 days accompanied with pain in the lower limbs and lower back. No
history of trauma was reported. Magnetic resonance imaging of the thoracolumbar spine demonstrated an epidural hematoma extending from T-12
to L-5 with thecal sac and cauda equina displacement anterior. The patient was treated in our department with a minimally invasive approach.
This operation method had been approved by Chinese Independent Ethics Committee. Three months following the operation, the patient had
regained the ability to walk with the aid of a cane and myodynamia tests revealed normal results for the left lower limb and a 4/5 grade for
the right limb. Importantly, no complications were exhibited from the surgical operation. The minimally invasive paraspinal approach through
tubular retractors is demonstrated here as an effective alternative method for the treatment of SSEH. Spontaneous spinal epidural hematoma
(SSEH) is an uncommon condition with an uncertain etiology that results in permanent neurological deficit or death when not treated
appropriately. This disease represents 0.3% to 0.9% of all epidural space-occupying lesions. It is characterized by the initial
manifestation of sudden-onset acute back or neck pain around the affected vertebra followed by the rapid progression of neurological
dysfunction, which is caused by compression of the thecal sac and cauda equina. Many cases can be diagnosed upon detailed neurological
examination and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). Despite this, the etiology of SSEE remains elusive in many cases, with no definitive
inciting event. Numerous risk factors have been reported including anticoagulant therapy, aspirin, coronary thrombolysis, lumbar puncture,
hypertension, and ankylosing spondylitis. Most surgeons advocate aggressive and prompt surgical intervention for SSEH cases, interventions
which may cause thecal sac and cauda equina compression and neurological dysfunction. Today, the most widely used surgical approach is
laminectomy. Here we reported a case of SSEH partial recovery from neurological dysfunction after minimal invasive laminectomy through
tubular retractors. In our department, we have generally used this approach to treat disc herniation, intraspinal tumors, and spinal
stenosis. This procedure is similar to partial laminectomy with the exception of using a tubular retractor instead of an open approach (Fig.
1). Schematic diagram of this approach. An 81-year-old woman was admitted to the neurology department experiencing persistent mild frequent
urination and dysuria for 1 year without any reported inducing factors. The symptoms developed included numbness and weakness of the
bilateral lower limbs and difficulty walking (more severe in the right lower extremity) 4 days before admission. Progressive weakness
developed over the next 3 days accompanied with pain in the lower limbs and lower back. Upon neurological examination, weakness was noted in
the right lower and left lower extremities at grades of 0/5(R) and 3/5(L), respectively, according to the Medical Research Council grading
scale. The bilateral lower-limb exhibited normal muscle tension though deep-tendon reflexes appeared absent and Babinski sign was negative.
A digital rectal examination indicated that rectal tone was normal for the patient. The remainder of the physical examination was normal.
During sensory examination, this patient was not cooperative. The patient's medical history did not reveal any notable events. At the moment
of admission, the patient's blood pressure was 158/78 mmHg and initial laboratory tests (including complete blood count, chemistry panel,
erythrocyte sedimentation rate, C-reactive protein, and coagulation evaluation) revealed no remarkable contributions. After initial
consultation, this patient was admitted to our department. The day after admission, MRI of the thoracolumbar spine demonstrated an epidural
hematoma extending from T-12 to L-5 with thecal sac and cauda equina displacement anterior (Fig. 2). Neurological deficits did not show any
improvement during the course of the following 3 days. We next explained the condition of the disease and the operative method to the
patient and her family. She was taken to the operating room for an emergency surgical decompression after the patient provided informed
consent. After general anesthesia, the patient was placed in prone position. On the left side of the skin which is distant from midline 2 cm
in T12, L3 level and right side of the skin which is distant from midline 2 cm in L2, L5 level, we made 4 longitudinal incisions about 2 cm
length (Fig. 3E). Separation of subcutaneous tissue reaching the muscle fascia and the paraspinal muscle was bluntly separated to lamina
from the space of the multifidus and longissimus. A tubular retractor device was inserted in this space and the appropriate position was
ascertained under x-ray. High-speed burr was used to grind off the lower edge of the T12, L2, L3, and L4 lamina and the upper edges of the
L1, L2, and L5 lamina (Fig. 3C), preventing damage to the zygapophysial joints and then dissected the ligamenta flava. The intraspinal dark
red hematoma compressing the thecal sac and cauda equina were visible (Fig. 3A) and an aspirator and detacher were used to evacuate the
hematoma. The hematoma in the vertebral canal, which is adjacent to the tube, could then also be eliminated via adjustment of the angle of
the tube. After evacuation all the hematoma, hydrogen peroxide and povidone–iodine was used to wash the operative cavity until we could
clearly observe the dural thecal sac expansion and cerebrospinal fluid pulsation (Fig. 3B). Drainage catheters were positioned at the
intraspinal extradural after operation (Fig. 3D). The duration of the operation was about 3 h and the total blood loss was about 50 mL. No
complications related to the surgical procedure were observed. A, Sagittal T1-weighted MRI revealed a hematoma (isointense and slight
hyperintense) located posterior to the thecal sac and cauda equine, extending from T12 to L5 (white arrows at the extremities of the mass).
B, Sagittal T2-weighted MRI revealed a hematoma (isointense and hypointense, white arrows at the extremities of the mass). C, Axial
T2-weighted MRI showed the hematoma (hypointense, white arrow) compressed the thecal sac and cauda equina (black arrow). A, Dark red
hematoma (white arrow) compressed the thecal sac. B, Thecal sac expanded and recovered (white arrow). C, The upper and lower edges of L2
vertebral plate were ground off (white arrows); zygapophysial joints were integrated. D, After surgery, drainage catheters (white arrows)
were positioned in the intraspinal extradural. E, Each surgical incision was about 2 cm length (1 month postoperative). In the first 24
postoperative hours, there was no significant improvement in neurologic function. Physical examination similarly showed no change compared
to preoperative results. The lower back and bilateral lower limb pain was reportedly relieved on the third postoperative day; moreover,
there was an obvious improvement in the tendon reflexes of bilateral lower limbs as blunt tendon reflexes were observed. On the tenth
postoperative day, the patient returned to normal urination and the catheter was removed. The left lower extremity showed improvement during
postoperative recovery and muscle strength examination was normal by the tenth day after surgery. The condition of the right lower extremity
was not apparently improved as muscle force examination received a grade of 1/5 until the patient was discharged. By the 3-month follow-up
examination, however, the patient could walk slowly with the help of a cane and myodynamia testing of right lower limb received a grade of
4/5. The pathogenesis of SSEH remains controversial. Patel et al considered that the bleeding is of venous origin. He supposed the mechanism
that reversal of blood flow in the valveless epidural venous plexus caused by activities such as evacuation, sneezing, bending, coughing,
and coitus could result in rupture of a fragile vein. Those activities could lead to the change of intrathoracic and intra-abdominal
pressure. Beside this, traction on nerve roots during operations lead to disruption of the tortuous arterial plexus was suggested to be
another source of epidural hematoma. Taking into consideration that the pressure in the epidural veins is less than intrathecal pressure
(confirmed by the common observation that the normally expanded dural sac may tamponade epidural venous bleeding encountered during surgical
procedures), Beatty and Winston hypothesized that arterial source bleeding is the main cause of acute SSEH. However, Groen has proposed that
the majority of SSEH actually results from a rupture of the posterior internal vertebral venous plexus, in a review of 199 cases of SSEH. He
has also considered that the rupture of the epidural artery might be responsible for some cases of SSEH. The anatomical structure of human
vertebra canal usually restricts epidural hematomas to the dorsal aspect of the epidural space with possible extension to the lateral
gutters. In these cases, epidural hematoma is presented in the dorsal aspect, where the definitive cause of SSEH cannot be defined. Various
factors had been reported in the etiology of SSEH, such as anticoagulant therapy, aspirin, coronary thrombolysis, lumbar puncture,
hypertension, ankylosing spondylitis, and vascular malformation. Patient age also appears to highly affect the level distribution of SSEH as
people who are less than 40 years old commonly experience SSEH localized to the cervicothoracic region, whereas patients over 40 years old
usually experience SSEH in the cervicothoracic and thoracolumbar regions. Our patient, who is 81 years old, presented a hematoma in the
T12–L5, in accordance with the literature. The patient, however, presented no obvious causal factors for SSEH. The typical symptoms of SSEH
include a sudden onset of neck or back pain at the involved vertebral level with radiating pain, followed by rapid and progressive signs and
symptoms of thecal sac and cauda equina compression. MRI, myelography and computed tomography (CT) are commonly used to diagnose spinal
epidural hematomas; however, CT cannot be used to determine when bleeding occurred and as such presents a limitation in terms of
differential diagnosis. On the contrary, MRI affords a superior diagnostic capability and has replaced CT and myelography as the main
diagnostic tool. MRI can inform the precise position of the hematoma, the extent and time frame of the bleeding, detection of thecal sac and
cauda equina compression, and spinal cord edema. The patient presented here received MRI examination on the sixth day after the initial
presentation of symptoms. In this case, we could see an obvious long-segmented SSEH had compressed and displaced thecal sac and cauda equina
extending from the T12 to L5 (sagittal view by T2-weighted MRI). This SSEH demonstrated isointensity and slight hyperintensity by
T1-weighted MRI and isointensity and hypointensity by T2-weighted MRI; this is in accordance with the subacute manifestation of hematoma in
MRI. In axial T2-weighted MRI, we could clearly observe thecal sac and cauda equina compression and pushing to the left side of spinal
canal. Neurological recovery is multifactorial. Preoperative neurological status and the time interval to surgery appear to be 2 critical
factors influencing the prognosis of SSEH. A longer interval to surgery is detrimental to a positive neurological outcome, on the other
hand, Foo et al. hold the opinion that there is no correlation between interval surgery and neurological outcome. Shin et al speculated that
early decompression (>12 hours constraining the ischemic change) yields a more favorable recovery. They have also suggested that patients
who experience early incomplete motor and sensory loss have a better chance at neurological recovery. Liao et al also reported that patients
with preoperative incomplete neurological deficits had a better neurological recovery than patients with preoperative complete neurological
deficits. Furthermore, prompt surgery (less than 48 hours from the initial onset of symptoms and less than 12 hours of complete neurological
deficits) could also achieve a satisfactory neurological recovery in patients with preoperative complete neurological deficits. In our
treatment, the patient was not diagnosed for the first time in our hospital though was admitted to our neurology department for conservative
treatment. Patient underwent surgery more than 6 days from the onset of symptoms and complete motor neurological deficit was observed in
this patient. The mainstream treatment of SSEH is emergency decompression and evacuation of the hematoma for prevention of permanent
neurological deficits. Some authors have suggested that in patients who demonstrate continual signs of clinical improvement and stability,
conservative treatment may be adopted. Currently, the standard operation method for SSEH is the open laminectomy method. Iida Y reported
that resection of the whole lamina, spinous process, medial part of the facet joint, and flavum ligament seems to play an important role in
the occurrence or progress of instability. The author also suggested that in the presence of adequate indications, partial laminectomy
should be selected to avoid the occurrence or progress of instability at the operated level. Muscular atrophy is another complication of
open laminectomy which may occur due to the damage of the paraspinal muscles. In addition, asymmetry of the paraspinal muscle may also
influence the occurrence of postoperative instability, preservation of paraspinal muscle and decrease the incidence of muscular injury—the
most important factors associated with a positive long-term clinical outcome. Marjan Alimi et al. have also reported that minimally invasive
laminectomy has a lower rate of postoperative instability, reduced blood loss, and a shorter hospital stay than the conventional open
laminectomy method. In this case report, a minimally invasive surgery was performed to decompress and evacuate hematoma via paraspinal
approach through tubular retractors. Through this alternative method, we are able to grind a hole on the skipped lamina with no damage to
the zygapophysis. Moreover, through this approach, a smaller trauma of the paraspinal muscles was achieved owing to the tubular retractor
system. Smaller intraoperative blood loss and shorter duration of postoperative pain are the other 2 advantages compared with standard
laminectomy. In this case study, the intraoperative blood loss was about 50 mL and the patient did not feel obvious wound pain 3 days after
surgery. Additionally, postoperative MRI showed complete removal of the SSEH, the thecal sac and spinal cord expansion and recovery (Figs.
4A–C). We report that through this surgical approach, surgery channels were small and the zygapophysis maintained integrity in postoperative
CT scan and reconstructed 3-dimensional CT scan (Fig. 5A–C). During the 3-month follow-up, spinal instability was found and the walking
capability of the patient was observed to be gradually improving. MRI of the patient 9 days postoperative [(A) sagittal T1-weighted, (B)
sagittal T2-weighted, and (C) axial T2-weighted) complete removal of the epidural hematoma, the thecal sac (white arrows) and spinal cord
(black arrows) expansion and recovery. CT scan (A) and reconstructed 3-dimensional CT scan (B and C) of this patient 9 days postoperative.
The surgical channel of operation (white arrow and circle) and the zygapophysis joint integrity (black circle). The minimally invasive
surgery used to decompress the spinal canal and evacuate the hematoma via paraspinal approach through tubular retractors may be an effective
alternative method to treat SSEH. This method has the advantages of causing minimal damage to the spinal bony structure, only a minor trauma
to the paraspinal muscles, and a relatively short postoperative pain recovery time. We would like to thank Clarity Manuscript Consultant LLC
(Indianapolis) for their language-editing service. Abbreviations: CT = computed tomography, MRI = magnetic resonance imaging, SSEH =
spontaneous spinal epidural hematoma. CF-F is the first author, and YD-Z contributed equally to this work and should be considered co-first
author. The authors declare no conflict of interest.
