Kartagener syndrome is an autosomal recessive genetic ciliary disorder comprising of a classic triad of sinusitis, situs inversus and
bronchiectasis. It's the one of primary ciliary dyskinesia disorders with manifestations present from childhood. Most patients of PCD have
situs inversus. We present a case of 18 year-old women with recurrent lower and upper respiratory tracts infections, and rhinolalia clausa.
Kartagener syndrome is a genetic disorder which is seen to affect ciliary movement; it was described by manes kartagener in 1933 comprising
a triad of situs inversus, bronchiectasis and sinusitis. The anomaly result on some specific genetic defects conducting to clinical
manifestations of a ciliary immotility. The Main anomaly is seen in the respiratory tract, such as recurrent lung infections caused by mucus
statis in the bronchi, and productive caught represent most symptom revealed. Nasal polyposis in those patients can gives disorder of
pronunciation. We report in this article a case of Kartagener's syndrome with rhinolalia clausa. A 18-year-old women presented with chronic
productive cough, and intermittent bilateral nasal obstruction. She had a history of recurrent episodes of respiratory tract infection and
facial pain since childhood, and did not suffer from hearing loss or recurring otitis media. She could independently perform activities of
daily living. On examination, the patient was pleasant, no chest pain, no distress, she spoke abnormally, and she had difficult to pronounce
some letters. Blood pressure, pulse, oxygen saturation were normal. On chest auscultation, there were coarse crackles audible over both lung
fields, and her heart sounds were heard best on the right side of the chest. Her chest X-ray PA view revealed the cardiac shadow and apex on
the right side. She presents a dextrocardia (Figure 1). Electrocardiogram (ECG) showed inverted “P” waves in L1 and AVL on left-sided chest
leads (Figure 2). High resolution computed tomography (HRCT) chest revealed bronchiectasis changes, CT abdomen confirmed situs inversus, and
the sinus CT scan reveals maxillary sinusitis and filling of nasal pits mainly on the left side (Figure 3, Figure 4, Figure 5). in
laboratory work-up, hemogram was normal, no anomaly in the protein electrophoresis, reactive protein C was normal, antinuclear antibody,
antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody,anti CCP antibody,rheumatoid factor, HIV serology were negative. Sputum for acid fast bacilli didn't
reveal the tuberculosis bacilli. The speech therapy examination report revealed the presence rhinolalia clausa associated with a single
articulation disorder. Nasal fiberoptic endoscopy was performed and showed bilateral grade 1 nasal polyposis and oral examination showed
posterior rhinorrhea. Ear microscopic examination and the audiogram were normal (Figure 6). On spirometry, expiratory value in the first
second (FEV1),84% of the reference value (2.31 l); forced vital capacity( FVC), 73% of the reference value (2.36 l); FEV1 /FVC, 97. She was
diagnosed with kartagener syndrome based on her clinical and radiological presentation, and currently she is reviewed in speech therapy for
reeducation and under local nasal corticosteroid. The evolution was favorable with a subsided of swelling on 6 months after the end of
treatment. The child shows no signs of local recurrence or other tuberculous location. Chest radiograph shows in the lower zone
bronchiectasis changes (white star), dextrocardia (blue arrow) and right-sided gastric bubble (white arrow) Electrocardiogram showed
inverted “P” waves in L1 and AVL on left-sided chest leads HRCT of the chest in parenchymal window and in axial section reveals
bronchiectasis and dextrocardia CT abdomen in axial section without contrast injection, shows situs inversus totalis with liver in the left
side and spleen in the right side Sinus CT scan reveals maxillary sinusitis and filling of nasal pits mainly on the left side ENT exam shows
nasal polyposis Kartagener syndrome is a rare congenital disease, with ciliopathic autosomal recessive genetic disorder, leading to defect
of cilia function lining the respiratory tract and fallopian tube . Sinusitis, bronchiectasis, situs inversus occurring in this condition
are due to abnormal ciliary motility. Those conditions lead to recurrent respiratory infections, because of accumulations of secretions
especially in lowers tracts [2, 3]. Patients with KS have usually sinusitis and nasal polyposis developed at the same time, conducting to
nasal obstruction and speech's anomaly. In the case under discussion, patient had a rhinolalia clausa and constrictive consonants disorder,
which is due to the early closure of the voice channel. Currently there are no solutions to restore normal ciliary beat. The Main
therapeutic measures are daily physiotherapy to facilitate drainage of bronchial secretions , inhaled bronchodilators, vaccinations and
antibiotics of infection [5, 6]. Frequently, the diagnosis of PCD is delayed in childhood because the lack of physician's knowledge about
the characteristics of the disease, and technical experience that is necessary for a precise a diagnosis [7, 8]. Prophylactic antibiotics
help minimise infective rhinosinusitis. Rarely is sinus surgery necessary or found to be effective in reducing nasal discharge. The sphenoid
and frontal sinuses can be hypoplastic or even aplastic . There is no proven role for the use of intranasal steroids or antihistamines, but
they are useful in treating any additional allergic rhinosinusitis. Endoscopic sinus surgery and the formation of a nasal antral window
underneath the inferior turbinate, may afford a transient improvement in upper and lower respiratory tract symptoms . Lobectomy is sometimes
required for the associated bronchiectasis . Kartagener's syndrome remains a rare disease but can be compatible with normal life if the
treatment is done early. Treatment with antibiotics, physiotherapy and appropriate surgical intervention has improved the prognosis in these
patients and, in many cases, lifespan may be normal. Early diagnosis is important. Once bronchiectasis is established, prognosis worsens
significantly. The authors declare no competing interest. MR drafted this manuscript with HE supervision. HS have made substantial
contributions to acquisition of data. JL have made substantial contributions to acquisition of data. AE have made substantial contributions
to acquisition of data. SN have made substantial contributions to acquisition of data. AO have made substantial contributions to acquisition
of data. MAB have made substantial contributions to acquisition of data. LE have made substantial contributions to acquisition of data. HE
have been involved in drafting the manuscript. IAR have been involved in drafting the manuscript. AA have been involved in drafting the
manuscript. All authors have read and agreed to the final version of this manuscript and have equally contributed to its content and to the
management of the case.
