Solitary fibrous tumor of the pleura (SFTP) is a rare tumor of fibroblastic origin. It can be quite vascular, and its surgical management
carries the risk of a major intra-operative bleed. The pre-operative use of endobronchial ultrasound (EBUS) to visualize the vascular supply
of the tumor has not been reported. We report a case of a patient presenting with progressive shortness of breath and cough who was found to
have a very large pleural-based tumor. We describe the use of medical thoracoscopy and EBUS to establish the diagnosis of SFTP and to
characterize the blood supply of the tumor. In the future, EBUS may provide an alternative to conventional angiography for both mapping and
embolizing tumor blood supply. Solitary fibrous tumor of the pleura (SFTP) is a rare mesenchymal tumor of fibroblastic origin. Approximately
80% of SFTP arise from the visceral pleura. SFTP can be highly vascular and involves major systemic arteries, such as the subclavian. The
treatment of SFTP is surgical resection; however, no standardized approach to the pre-operative evaluation of SFTP has been described.
Herein, we report the case of a large SFTP that was evaluated pre-operatively using endobronchial ultrasound (EBUS) to assess tumor
vascularization and thoracoscopy to obtain tissue samples for diagnosis. Given the exceptional vascularization noted during this pre-
operative assessment, interventional radiology-guided embolization of a branch of the phrenic artery was performed before surgical
resection. Institutional review board approval and informed consent were waived, as this is a retrospective case report with no identifying
patient information presented. A 65-year-old healthy male with no prior past medical history presented to his primary care provider with
complaints of worsening shortness of breath and cough for several months. His physical examination was significant for dullness to
percussion over the right hemithorax and absent airflow on auscultation of the same area. Chest x-ray revealed a dense opacification of the
right lung base with marked hypoinflation of the right lung. A subsequent CT scan of the chest confirmed the presence of a large mass
filling the lower right hemithorax, compressing the right lung, and causing mild mediastinal shift (Fig. 1). The patient was referred for a
transthoracic CT-guided needle biopsy. The resultant histopathology revealed fibrous tissue, but was inadequate to make a definitive
diagnosis. Computed tomography scan and chest radiograph showing a large mass occupying the right lower hemithorax. The case was discussed
with a multidisciplinary team, including members of the interventional pulmonary and thoracic surgery services. Because of the tumor's very
large size and concern about proceeding with en bloc resection without definitive pathology or characterization of its blood supply, the
decision was made to do further testing. Medical thoracoscopy, bronchoscopy, and EBUS were performed in a single diagnostic session by the
interventional pulmonologist. The patient received intravenous anesthesia. An endotracheal tube was placed by an anesthesiologist. Flexible
bronchoscopy was performed to exclude endobronchial involvement of the lesion. Because the vascular supply of SFTP often originates from the
subclavian or central arteries, we used curvilinear EBUS to evaluate the tumor vasculature by starting from the upper trachea. The tumor was
visualized beginning at the level of the main carina. Scanning, at the distal end of the bronchus intermedius, revealed a large vessel
supplying the mass originating from the direction of the diaphragm. Based on the anatomical location, we felt that this likely corresponded
to a branch of the phrenic artery (Fig. 2). No medial or superior feeding vessels were identified by EBUS. Medical thoracoscopy was then
performed with a semi-rigid thoracoscope in order to obtain biopsies and inspect the surface of the tumor (Fig. 2). Very brief, single-lung
ventilation was performed by placing a balloon blocker to the right main stem bronchus. Then, careful blunt dissection at the 5th
intercostal space (midline axillary) was performed. The blunt 8 mm trocar then passed into the pleural space successfully. The bronchial
blocker was then removed and the right lung was allowed to re-expand. The tumor's lateral surface was examined and biopsies were obtained
with flexible forceps. To obtain immediate hemostasis in a possible event of bleeding during thoracoscopic biopsy, argon plasma coagulator
and a thoracic surgeon were present in thoracoscopy room. However, there was no significant bleeding during thoracoscopic biopsy of tumor
mass. A total of 6 biopsies ranging in size from 0.3 to 1.0 cm were obtained. Pathology of SFTP was confirmed. Thoracoscopy revealed a large
tumor with both vascular (upper left) and encapsulated (lower left) components. EBUS (right) showed no endobronchial invasion but evidence
of a large vessel feeding the tumor. EBUS, endobronchial ultrasound. Because of both the observed vascularity of the tumor and its large
size, the patient was referred for IR-guided angiography and embolization of the phrenic artery (Fig. 3). The following day, a right
thoracotomy was performed and the lesion was removed en bloc. The excised tumor measured 25 cm in diameter and weighed 2606 g, one of the
largest reported in the literature (Fig. 4). Three chest tubes were left in place. On post-operative day 1, a chest x-ray showed significant
re-expansion of the right lung (Fig. 3). The patient's hospital course was complicated by brief new-onset atrial fibrillation with rapid
ventricular response and development of a large pleural effusion. He remained afebrile and his incisions were without signs or symptoms of
infection throughout his stay. The chest tubes were removed on post-operative day 8 and the patient was discharged home on post-operative
day 9. At the time of discharge, he reported marked improvement of shortness of breath and cough. Angiography identified the phrenic artery
as the main blood supply of the tumor (left). Chest radiograph on post-operative day 1 showed adequate lung re-expansion (right). The
excised solitary fibrous tumor of the pleural measured 25 cm in diameter and weighed 2606 g. Primary tumors of the pleura are classified
into two major categories: diffuse and solitary. Solitary tumors are typically fibrous and not asbestos related, whereas diffuse pleural
neoplasms are typically asbestos related. SFTP was first described by Wagner in 1870, and defined pathologically by Klemperer and Rabin in
1931. SFTP occurs equally in men and women, affecting most patients in the 6th and 7th decades of life. The incidence of SFTP is low in
comparison to that of malignant pleural mesothelioma. Approximately 80% of SFTP are benign, and treatment for both benign and malignant
tumors consists of surgical resection. Whereas surgical resection is the standard treatment for SFTP, the pre-operative evaluation of such
tumors varies. Tissue diagnosis can be difficult to obtain before surgical resection. As with our patient, percutaneous transthoracic needle
biopsy of the mass often fails to yield enough tissue for diagnosis. We believe that medical thoracoscopy may provide an alternative means
of obtaining adequate tissue samples. It has also been suggested that pre-operative bronchoscopy is of no utility beyond ruling out
endobronchial involvement of the tumor. However, prior case reports note that SFTP can be highly vascular and involve major systemic
arteries, such as the subclavian, predisposing to a high risk of intra-operative complications. This has led some surgeons to recommend pre-
operative angiography and potential embolization of massive SFTP to reduce the risk of intra-operative bleeding and improve overall
outcomes. We believe that the present EBUS technology provides limited, but important information in evaluating the vasculature of large
SFTPs. Endoscopic ultrasound enodoscopy (EUS), on the contrary, has been used in other settings to control bleeding and embolize vessels. As
higher depth EBUS becomes available, this technology may mitigate the need for contrast exposure via angiogram, particularly in high-risk
patients such as those with renal failure or contrast allergies. Although limited to a single case, the present report is the first, up to
our knowledge, to suggest that future advances in EBUS technology may provide an alternative option to angiography, both diagnostically and
therapeutically in the pre-operative evaluation of SFTP. Further investigation is warranted to validate this approach. Abbreviations: CT
scan = computed tomography scan, EBUS = endobronchial ultrasound, EUS = endoscopic ultrasound, IR = interventional radiology, SFTP =
solitary fibrous tumor of the Pleura. The authors have no conflicts of interest to disclose.
