Airway compression due to distal aortic arch and descending aortic aneurysm repair has been documented. This case of tracheal and left main
stem bronchus compression due to aortic aneurysm occurred in a 42-year-old man. The airway compression poses a challenge for the
anesthesiologist in airway management during aortic aneurysm repair surgery. The fiber-optic bronchoscope is very helpful in decision-making
both preoperatively and postoperatively in such cases. We report a case of airway compression in a 42-year-old patient who underwent
elective distal aortic arch and descending aortic aneurysm repair. Vascular tracheobronchial compression syndrome could be acquired or
congenital, commonly seen with double aortic arch, aberrant subclavian artery, and pulmonary artery sling. Kommerell's diverticulum is a
rare cause of tracheobronchial compression. Aneurysms of aortic arch and descending thoracic aorta can also cause airway compression.
Chronic compression of trachea can lead to tracheomalacia. Various methods are used to rule out airway compression or tracheomalacia in the
postoperative period. We describe a case where intraoperative fiber-optic bronchoscopy (FOB) was used to rule out the airway compression. A
42-year-old male was admitted in our cardiac center with a history of dry cough, hoarseness of voice, and chest pain for the past 4 months.
Chest X-ray showed a widened mediastinum and dilated descending thoracic aorta with elevated left hemidiaphragm [Figure 1]. Computed
tomography (CT) angiography revealed a large fusiform aneurysm of the arch of aorta and proximal descending thoracic aorta, distal to the
left common carotid artery with involvement of origin of the left subclavian artery. The descending thoracic aorta showed aneurysmal
dilatation till D8 level. The saccular part of the aneurysm measured 8.5 cm × 7.0 cm with total craniocaudal span of the aneurysmally
dilated segment measuring 16 cm. Compression and narrowing of the trachea was seen with displacement of the trachea and esophagus toward the
right. The left major bronchus was mildly displaced anteriorly. Atelectatic changes were seen in the left lower lobe [Figure 2].
Posteroanterior view of chest X-ray depicting aortic arch aneurysm and elevated left diaphragm (a) Contrast-enhanced computed tomography
chest showing aortic arch aneurysm compressing the tracheal lumen and left main stem bronchus. (b) Three-dimensional reconstructed view of
the aneurysm The surgical plan in this case was to exclude the thoracic aneurysm and reduce the volume of the aneurysm to reduce compression
on the airways. This aneurysm could have been treated by placing a stent graft, but this would not have reduced pressure on the airways for
several weeks to months. Thus, the open surgical repair was planned under cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB) through peripheral cannulation.
Transesophageal echocardiography was performed perioperatively in this case. In preanesthetic assessment, all laboratory investigations were
normal, with arterial pressure (blood pressure ) of 110/70 mmHg and heart rate of 72 beats/min. Preinduction monitoring included
electrocardiogram, pulse oximetry, bispectral index, and invasive BP in the right radial and left femoral artery. Femoral vein and femoral
artery were prepared for emergency femoro-femoral bypass. After induction of anesthesia and endotracheal intubation, FOB was performed to
see the extent of tracheal compression. It showed a narrowed and pulsatile trachea at the level of carina. The left main stem bronchus was
also narrowed. The right main stem bronchus was normal in caliber [Figure 3]. Preoperative fiber-optic bronchoscopic image showing external
compression of the trachea (white arrow) (a) and left main stem bronchus (black arrow) (b) by aortic arch aneurysm After heparinization, CPB
was commenced using the right femoral and right axillary arterial cannulation. Interposition dacron graft of 16 mm was used for anastomosis
of thoracic aorta. The left subclavian artery was sacrificed. Before chest closure, a repeat FOB was carried out to see the residual
tracheal compression and rule out the presence of tracheomalacia. Bronchoscopy showed a normal caliber trachea at the level of carina
[Figure 4]. The left main stem bronchus was also normal in caliber. No residual narrowing or tracheomalacia was seen. The patient developed
quadriplegia in the postoperative period, which was successfully managed with cerebrospinal fluid drainage. The patient was extubated on
postoperative day 6. Postextubation, the patient was stable with no difficulty in breathing and no stridor. On the 10th postoperative day,
the patient was discharged from the hospital. Postoperative fiber-optic bronchoscopic image showing trachea, carina, and both main bronchus
with no narrowing of tracheal lumen or left main bronchus Tracheobronchial compression is a well-known complication of aneurysms of the
ascending aorta and/or the aortic arch. In general, compression occurs because of the close anatomic relationship of the aortic arch to the
trachea and the left main stem bronchus. Patients with thoracic aortic aneurysm (TAA) may be asymptomatic or may be found incidentally
during workup for other processes. Symptoms vary according to the size, location, and changes in the aneurysm. Tracheobronchial compression
commonly presents with chest, back, and abdominal pain in patients who are symptomatic. Hoarseness may signify vagus or left recurrent
laryngeal nerve compression. Wheezing, dyspnea, or cough suggest tracheal compression. Hemoptysis may be a sign of aneurysmal erosion into
the trachea. The findings of the physical examination are usually normal. CT scanning, magnetic resonance imaging, angiography, and
transesophageal echocardiography are most often used to assess thoracic aneurysm. The preferred method of assessment depends on the
stability of the patient, the availability of radiographic modalities, and the preference of the surgeon. However, CT scanning is most
commonly used in both emergent and outpatient settings to diagnose and follow thoracic aneurysm. Chest radiography should be obtained in the
initial workup of patients with chest discomfort. Findings suggestive of aneurysm include mediastinal widening, blurring of the aortic knob,
and tracheal displacement. An elevated hemidiaphragm may suggest phrenic nerve compression from mass effect, as seen in our case, but this
finding is exceedingly rare compared with the other findings listed. Intravenous contrast-enhanced CT scanning is the investigation of
choice for the diagnosis. Its sensitivity is 96–100% and specificity is 99% for detecting aneurysms. CT scanning is useful in evaluating
aneurysm size, proximal and distal extension, presence or absence of dissection, and in seeking other pathologies within the chest. Contrast
angiography is useful in assessing the complex aortic pathology and identifying the anatomy of branch vessels. Its sensitivity is 85% and
specificity is 95% in detecting aneurysms. Angiography has been considered the gold standard for specifically delineating topographic
vascular anatomy, relative dimensions, and flow distributions, which can explain the mechanism of airway compression in many such cases.
Magnetic resonance angiography is useful in assessing the aortic anatomy, the size of the aneurysm, the dissection, and the branch vessels.
Its sensitivity is 100% and specificity is 100% in detecting aneurysms. Magnetic resonance angiography does not require the administration
of iodinated radiologic contrast material. Patients who present with a descending TAA and require lung isolation can be managed with either
a left-sided double-lumen endotracheal tube (DLT) or a right-sided DLT if there is a compression of the entrance of the left main stem
bronchus. With a large aneurysm of the descending thoracic aorta, the anatomy can be distorted if the aneurysm compresses the trachea or the
entrance of the left main stem bronchus. This may make the placement of a left-sided DLT dangerous in patients in whom the aneurysm involves
the left main stem bronchus because the potential exists for rupture of the aneurysm. Contraindications for the use of double-lumen tubes
include anatomic barriers that make positioning improbable or dangerous (i.e., carinal or bronchial lesions, strictures, and vascular
compression by aortic aneurysm). Therefore, a decision of using single-lumen tube was taken. The crucial importance of intraoperative
bronchoscopic monitoring of airway decompression and its effectiveness has been emphasized in several reports. Flexible bronchoscope
facilitated inspection of all the accessible airway portions, assessment of endoluminal tissue properties of the airway wall, and effective
direct clearing of retained secretions after decompression. Tracheomalacia can be sometimes associated with congenital (or acquired) aortic
arch abnormalities. The acquired form of tracheomalacia may be secondary to chronic external compression by mediastinal mass, but rarely,
chronic aortic arch aneurysm causing tracheomalacia has been reported in literature. As such in this case, the history was of 4 months only
and any aneurysm causing tracheomalacia is rare. Tracheomalacia can occur in cases of aortic arch aneurysm with a posterior expansion, a
long-standing compression of the tracheobronchial tree, and can be managed with the endoscopic implantation of a silicon T or T-Y tube. FOB
is used to diagnose the airway compression and it is also being used to deploy expandable metallic airway stents. Our patient did not have
airway compression postsurgery and therefore, he was planned for early weaning and extubation. This case report highlights the utility of
confirming the extent, location, and severity of tracheal and bronchial compression with an FOB before and after the aortic arch aneurysm
surgery, which helps in deciding the course of action for airway management. Patients with a large TAA may develop an airway compression.
During the preoperative evaluation, review of the chest X-ray and CT scan is important to determine if the trachea or the left main stem
bronchus has any compression due to a large aneurysm. In addition, review of the chest CT scan will determine the precise location of the
compression. FOB is the best method to diagnose an airway compression in patients with a descending TAA to rule out any postoperative
tracheomalacia and deciding the course of action postoperatively. Nil. There are no conflicts of interest.
