Filler injection for face augmentation is a common cosmetic procedure in the last decades, in our case report we describe long-term outcomes
of a devastating complication of ophthalmic artery emboli following Calcium Hydroxylapatite filler injection to the nose bridge. A healthy
24-year-old women received a Calcium Hydroxylapatite filler injection to her nose bridge for the correction of nose asymmetry 8 years post
rhinoplasty. She developed sudden right eye ocular pain and visual disturbances. Visual acuity was 20/20 in both eyes and visual field in
the right eye showed inferior arch with fixation sparing and supero-temporal central scotoma. Examination revealed marked periorbital edema
and hematoma, ptosis, ocular movements limitation, an infero-temporal branch retinal artery occlusion and multiple choroidal emboli.
Eighteen months post initial presentation ptosis and eye movements returned normal and choroidal emboli absorbed almost completely. However,
visual acuity declined to 20/60, visual field showed severe progressive deterioration with a central and supero-nasal field remnant and the
optic disc became pallor. Cosmetic injection of calcium hydroxylapatite to the nose bridge can result in arterial emboli to the ophthalmic
system with optic nerve, retinal and choroidal involvement causing long term severe visual acuity and visual field impairment. Aesthetic
soft-tissue filler injection for face augmentation has gained popularity in last decade, owing their relatively easy nonsurgical delivery,
rapid results and low cost office based procedure. During the last years a growing amount of complications have been related to the
procedure including allergic reaction, granuloma formation, skin necrosis or cellulitis as well as ophthalmic and retinal artery occlusion
or embolization . Calcium hydroxylapetite (CaHA) is a semipermanent soft tissue filler, which may last 1 to 2 years in tissue. It is used
mainly for face augmentation and is well adopted for the correction of post rhinoplasty deficiencies and asymmetries . To date, only three
case reports published on ocular embolism post CaHA injection to the glabella and nose bridge . These cases had very poor initial visual
acuities and only two cases had a short-term follow-up. We report a case of CaHA emboli to the choroid and retinal artery, demonstrated by
spectral domain optical coherence tomography (SD-OCT), with a long-term follow-up. In our case, initial visual acuity was preserved but
during 18 months follow-up visual acuity and visual field gradually deteriorated. A healthy 24-year-old female, underwent injection of CaHA
to her nose bridge for the correction of nose asymmetry, 8 years post rhinoplasty. The injection was carried out by an ophthalmologist who
is not an oculoplastic specialist. Immediately after the injection the patient complained of right eye (RE) periocular pain and blurred
vision. Attempts were made to withdraw material from the injection site by aspiration, in addition to hot water compresses and topical
massage. On examination 3 h post injection, visual acuity (VA) was 20/20 in both eyes. RE examination revealed no relative afferent
pupillary defect (RAPD), a periorbital hematoma, skin bruising on the nose bridge and forehead, ptosis with mild levator function, prominent
conjunctival congestion and RE exotropia (Fig. 1). In addition, limitation in adduction, superior and inferior eye movements were found.
Fundus examination revealed deep yellowish emboli which appeared as choroidal emboli at the level of the choriocapillaris and sattler’s
layer on SD-OCT enhanced depth imaging (EDI) (Fig. 2a). Emboli were scattered diffusely mostly in the superior, inferior and nasal parts of
the choroid (Fig. 3a). CaHA emboli were also found in the infero-temporal branch of the retinal artery causing an occlusion with an adjacent
cotton-wool spot (Fig. 4a). Choroidal thickness was normal and equal in both eyes. RE 30–2 Humphrey visual fields (VF) showed extensive
inferior scotoma with fixation sparing which can be explained by the massive distribution of emboli in the superior retina, supero-temporal
ceco-central scotoma corresponding to the area of the infero-temporal branch artery occlusion and superior peripheral scotoma corresponding
to the upper eyelid swelling and ptosis (Fig. 5a). The patient refused fluorescein and indocyanine green angiography examinations. Left eye
(LE) examination was normal. Head and orbits computed tomography (CT) demonstrated linear deposits with bone density in the right medial
upper eyelid and nose bridge, CT angiography showed no arterial occlusion and on CT venography there were no sinus vein filling defects. No
signs of central nervous system infarction where demonstrated. Initial treatment included Enoxaparin sodium (Clexane, Aventis, France) 60 mg
twice a day for 2 days, which was discontinued after exclusion of thrombotic event. Acetylsalicylic acid (Micropirin, Dexcel pharma, Israel)
100 mg per day, Amoxicillin/Clavulanate (Augmentin, GlaxoSmithKline, UK) 875 mg twice a day for 7 days and Prednisone (Prednisone, Rekah,
Israel) 60 mg per day which was gradually tapered down. Topical antibiotics – Ofloxacin 0.3 % (Oflox, ALLERGAN, Ireland) eye drops and
Mupirocin (Bactroban, GlaxoSmithKline, UK) ointment to the nose bridge and forehead area were given for 14 days. Two months post initial
treatment, best corrected visual acuity (BCVA) was 20/32 in the RE and 20/20 in the LE. RE examination revealed normal eyelids, normal eye
movements, with no RAPD. The optic disc became pale, the cotton wool spot along the infero-temporal branch of the retinal artery partially
absorbed (Fig. 4b) but the CaHA emboli were still seen in the fundus photograph (Fig. 3b). The EDI-OCT reveal some degree of absorption of
the CaHA emboli in the choroid as the hyper reflective choroidal dots became less prominent (Fig. 2b). 30–2 Humphrey VF revealed marked
deterioration; inferior and temporal deep scotoma with central and nasal field sparing (Fig. 5b). Six months post treatment initiation BCVA
was 20/40 in the RE and 20/20 in the LE. The infero-temporal artery was occluded by CaHA emboli (Fig. 4c) and the amount of the choroidal
emboli was significantly reduced (Figs. 2c and 3c). Visual field examination further deteriorated, showing a central nasal field remnant
(Fig. 5c). At the end of follow up 18 months post initial presentation BCVA was 20/60 in the RE, choroidal emboli almost completely absorbed
(Fig. 3d). Visual field examination further deteriorated, stimulus III can not be performed and stimulus V showing inferior deep visual
filed defect and marked peripheral superior decline in sensitivity (Fig. 5d)Fig. 1Facial photograph at presentation. Skin bruising on the
nose bridge and forehead, ptosis and right eye exotropiaFig. 2Fundus color picture, infrared and enhanced depth imaging SD-OCT - choroidal
emboli. a At presentation: color picture and infrared - deep bright emboli (yellow arrows). SD-OCT - choriocapillary emboli (red arrow), and
sattler’s layer choroidal emboli (yellow arrows). b Two months post presentation: partial absorption of emboli as shown in color picture,
infrared and SD-OCT (yellow and red arrows). c Six months post presentation: additional absorption of emboli as shown in color picture and
infrared (yellow arrows), SD-OCT - no emboli detected (yellow and red arrows)Fig. 3Right eye Fundus color picture. a At presentation:
diffusely distributed choroidal emboli in superior, nasal and inferior quadrant. b Two months post presentation: partial absorption of
emboli, optic disc pallor. c Six months post presentation: prominent absorption of emboli, optic disc pallor. d Eighteen months post
presentation: choroidal emboli almost completely absorbedFig. 4Fundus color picture, infrared and SD-OCT: color picture- CaHA emboli in the
infero-temporal branch of the retinal artery (yellow arrow), CWS (green arrow). SD-OCT- intra-arterial emboli (white arrows), retinal
thickness (yellow caliper). a At presentation. b Two months post presentation. c Six months post presentationFig. 5Right eye 30–2 Humphrey
visual field examination. a At presentation: extensive inferior scotoma with fixation sparing, supero-temporal ceco-central scotoma. b Two
months post presentation: marked deterioration showing inferior and temporal deep scotoma with central and nasal field sparing. c Six months
post presentation: further deterioration showing a nasal field remnant. d Eighteen months post presentation: stimulus V showing inferior
deep visual filed defect and marked peripheral superior decline in sensitivity Facial photograph at presentation. Skin bruising on the nose
bridge and forehead, ptosis and right eye exotropia Fundus color picture, infrared and enhanced depth imaging SD-OCT - choroidal emboli. a
At presentation: color picture and infrared - deep bright emboli (yellow arrows). SD-OCT - choriocapillary emboli (red arrow), and sattler’s
layer choroidal emboli (yellow arrows). b Two months post presentation: partial absorption of emboli as shown in color picture, infrared and
SD-OCT (yellow and red arrows). c Six months post presentation: additional absorption of emboli as shown in color picture and infrared
(yellow arrows), SD-OCT - no emboli detected (yellow and red arrows) Right eye Fundus color picture. a At presentation: diffusely
distributed choroidal emboli in superior, nasal and inferior quadrant. b Two months post presentation: partial absorption of emboli, optic
disc pallor. c Six months post presentation: prominent absorption of emboli, optic disc pallor. d Eighteen months post presentation:
choroidal emboli almost completely absorbed Fundus color picture, infrared and SD-OCT: color picture- CaHA emboli in the infero-temporal
branch of the retinal artery (yellow arrow), CWS (green arrow). SD-OCT- intra-arterial emboli (white arrows), retinal thickness (yellow
caliper). a At presentation. b Two months post presentation. c Six months post presentation Right eye 30–2 Humphrey visual field
examination. a At presentation: extensive inferior scotoma with fixation sparing, supero-temporal ceco-central scotoma. b Two months post
presentation: marked deterioration showing inferior and temporal deep scotoma with central and nasal field sparing. c Six months post
presentation: further deterioration showing a nasal field remnant. d Eighteen months post presentation: stimulus V showing inferior deep
visual filed defect and marked peripheral superior decline in sensitivity Our case demonstrates long-term results of a devastating ocular
complication post CaHA filler injection to the nose bridge. CaHA emboli to the arterial ophthalmic system caused partial ophthalmoplegia,
branch retinal artery occlusion, and multiple choroidal emboli. Vascular related events are major complications of soft tissue filler
injection and can occur from direct needle injury to the vessels, external compression of vessels by surrounding filler or intravascular
embolism of injected material. Intra-arterial embolism formation after soft tissue filler injection to the nose bridge may be caused by
anterograde arterial flow of material injected trough artery-vein anastomosis found in the nose mucosa, or by retrograde arterial
displacement of the injected product. The latter can occur when injection pressure is higher than systolic arterial pressure and the
injected product moves from peripheral arterial vessels into proximal arterial vessels. After stopping the injection the product flow with
the blood stream to peripheral arterial branches and cause an embolic event . We assume that in our case the CaHA was directly injected to
the dorsal nasal artery which is a peripheral artery in the ophthalmic system and then moved retrograde with the blood stream to the various
branches of the ophthalmic artery. Involvement of the central retinal artery and posterior ciliary artery may explain the branch retinal
artery and multiple choroidal emboli. Supraorbital, infraorbital and muscular arteries emboli may explain the ophthalmoplegia and ptosis. To
date, only 3 cases on ocular complications following CaHA filler injection were published . Of them, only two cases reported on posterior
segment involvement. The first case was published by Kim et al. and demonstrated bilateral blindness after CaHA filler injection for nose
augmentation. The patient presented with local skin necrosis, bilateral total ophthalmoplegia, anterior chamber ischemia and ophthalmic
artery obstruction with multiple retinal arteries and choroidal emboli. Initial VA was no light perception in both eyes. Unfortunately no
information regarding treatment or follow up was provided. Hsiao et al. recently published a case of unilateral distal retinal arteries and
choroidal emboli post CaHA injection to the glabella. Initial VA was hand motion. Management included various topical and systemic
treatments, at 3 month follow up VA achieved 20/200. Our case is the first to demonstrate CaHA emboli documented over 18 months follow up.
In our case, the patient initially presented with preserved VA. Treatment included anticoagulants and systemic corticosteroids as
recommended in cases suspected of intravascular filler injection . At 18 months follow-up, VA and VF markedly deteriorated although
choroidal emboli were reduced significantly. We assume that massive amount of CaHA emboli to the ophthalmic artery branches caused a
significant decrease in retinal, choroidal and optic nerve perfusion resulting in irreversible VF damage with progressive deterioration of
VF and VA over time. Ptosis and ophthalmoplegia completely resolved which may be explained by renewal of arterial flow and muscle cells
rehabilitation. Ophthalmic artery embolization secondary to CaHA filler injection to the nose bridge may cause a devastating long-term
outcome. Physicians should be aware of this complication and inform their patients before offering these cosmetic treatments. BCVA, best
corrected visual acuity; CaHA, calcium hydroxylapetite; EDI, enhanced depth imaging; LE, left eye; RAPD, relative afferent pupillary defect;
RE, right eye; SD-OCT, spectral domain optical coherence tomography; VA, visual acuity; VF, visual fields None. No funding was obtained for
this case report. All the data supporting our findings is contained within the manuscript, and any identifying or confidential patient data
should not be shared. EC contributed to manuscript conception and design, acquisition and analysis of data. YY, AK, DG and RBC contributed
to acquisition, analysis and interpretation of data. IL and AK contributed to conception and design, analysis and interpretation of data,
ZHW contributed to manuscript conception and design, acquisition and analysis of data. All authors have been involved in drafting the
manuscript or revising it criticall, have given final approval of the version to be published and agreed to be accountable for all aspects
of the work. All the authors of this case report has no commercial associations that might pose a competing interest in connection of the
submitted article. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this Case report and any accompanying images. A
copy of the written consent is available for review by the editor of this journal. Not applicable.
