Primary vitreoretinal lymphoma (PVRL) is a rare and fatal ocular malignancy that is mostly classified as diffuse large B cell lymphoma
(DLBCL). PVRL is often fatal because of its association with the central nervous system (CNS). PVRL frequently masquerades as uveitis and
sometimes recurs in clinical findings as keratic precipitates (KPs) and subretinal lesions. Pseudohypopyon is one of the clinical findings
of the local recurrence of PVRL and is treated with radiotherapy; however, the effectiveness of local control with an intravitreal injection
of methotrexate (MTX) has not yet been determined. We herein present a case of recurrent vitreoretinal lymphoma that repeatedly developed
pseudohypopyon and treated with intravitreal MTX. A 64-year-old woman was diagnosed with PVRL involving primary central nervous system
lymphoma (PCNSL). She received radiotherapy to the whole brain and a local ocular treatment, which resulted in temporary remission of the
disease. Pseudohypopyon was detected during the follow-up. It was 2-mm high, viscous, and swollen in the center. Anterior chamber biopsy
revealed the presence of atypical lymphocytes, indicating the recurrence of DLBCL. Pseudohypopyon was treated with intravitreal methotrexate
and completely disappeared. Pseudohypopyon has since repeatedly appeared and been treated with intravitreal MTX each time. The recurrence of
PVRL with KPs and subretinal invasion was treated with intravitreal MTX each time. Recurrence with pseudohypopyon was not simultaneous with
KPs or subretinal invasion. No CNS involvement was detected during the observation period. Pseudohypopyon is one of the signs of recurrent
vitreoretinal lymphoma. Although pseudohypopyon was temporarily controlled with intravitreal MTX, this treatment did not completely induce
its remission. Primary vitreoretinal lymphoma (PVRL) is a subset of primary central nervous system lymphoma (PCNSL), mostly diffuse large
B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL). PVRL is often fatal because of its association with the CNS . Approximately 80 % of PVRL patients eventually
develop PCNSL, and the 5-year survival rate of PVRL has been reported to be 30–60 % . PVRL frequently masquerades as uveitis and
difficulties are associated with making an accurate diagnosis in the absence of CNS involvement. PVRL is sometimes misdiagnosed as uveitis
because the clinical features of PVRL masquerade as uveitis and most PVRL cases are initially responsive to corticosteroids. Patients with
PVRL generally have blurred vision and floaters. The clinical features of PVRL are keratic precipitates (KPs), vitreous opacities, and
subretinal invasion. PVRL often recurs even though it is treated systemically. In recurrent cases, the same ocular findings, such as KPs,
vitreous cells, and subretinal invasion, are observed . Pseudohypopyon is rare, but one of the significant clinical manifestations of local
recurrence. A previous study reported that pseudohypopyon was observed in patients with a malignant tumor and Ewing’s sarcoma . The standard
treatment for patients with PVRL is a combination of systemic chemotherapy and radiation . Intravitreal methotrexate (MTX) and intravitreal
rituximab are currently the standard treatment options for intraocular lesions . The effectiveness of high-dose (HD) MTX for the treatment
of PVRL with CNS involvement has also been reported . The same strategy has been selected to treat recurrent cases, depending on patient
systemic conditions . There are several case reports in the literature on the treatment of PVRL that relapsed with pseudohypopyon. These
findings suggest that it is possible to treat and control pseudohypopyon in recurrent PVRL with local radiotherapy . However, local
chemotherapy and its effectiveness have not yet been examined in these patients. In the present study, we reported the rare complication of
recurrent pseudohypopyon in a patient with PVRL treated with intravitreal MTX. We also monitored treatment-associated changes in the lesion
by serial examinations. A 64-year-old woman presented to a local doctor in 2000 with blurred vision in her right eye. She was diagnosed with
chronic iridocyclitis and treated with topical corticosteroids with limited improvements. More detailed examinations were not performed at
that time. In 2003, she consulted a neurologist for depression, and thereafter was diagnosed with CNS lymphoma by brain MRI. On
presentation, best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA) was 20/20 in the right eye and 20/20 in the left eye, and intraocular pressure was normal.
A slit-lamp examination showed KPs and inflammatory cells (2+) in the anterior chamber of the right eye. A fundus examination of the right
eye revealed vitreous opacities (3+). Slit-lamp and fundus examinations of the left eye showed no abnormalities. Since the identification of
lymphoma cells in the vitreous is required for a diagnosis of PVRL, we performed diagnostic vitrectomy. A vitreous biopsy sample indicated
increased IL-10 levels (379 ng/mL) and an elevated IL-10 to IL-6 (12.6 pg/mL) ratio. A cytological analysis also showed large atypical
lymphoid cells, resulting in DLBCL. She was diagnosed with PVRL with CNS involvement and started treatment. She underwent one course of
intravenous HD MTX chemotherapy (3.5 g/m2) and radiotherapy to the right eye of 40Gy. Brain recurrence has not been observed since then.
Bilateral involvement was detected during the observation period. KPs and anterior chamber cells are also observed in the left eye. She had
been repeatedly treated with a dose of 400 μg of intravitreal MTX and a dose of 1 mg of intravitreal rituximab for recurrent intraocular
lesions between 2004 and 2011: intravitreal MTX; 7 times for the right eye/3 times for the left eye: intravitreal rituximab; 7 times for the
right eye. The MTX injections were administered using a 30-gauge needle after application of a topical anesthesia and 5 % povidone iodine
disinfection in the superior temporal quadrant 3.5 mm posterior to the limbus. Intravitreal rituximab was also administered to the
recurrence from 2008 to 2009 and was temporally effective; however, the iridocyclitis as the side effects of injection was developed each
time. Therefore, intravitreal rituximab was discontinued. In 2012, she presented at our hospital with blurred vision in her right eye. BCVA
in her right eye was 20/250. A slit-lamp examination of the right eye showed a 2-mm high viscous pseudohypopyon, anterior chamber cells
(3+), and flare (2+) (Fig. 1a). KPs were not observed. A fundus examination of the right eye showed (3+) strong vitreous opacities
(Fig. 1b); however, subretinal invasion was not observed. There was no abnormal finding in her left eye at the time of right eye recurrence.
Anterior chamber biopsy revealed the presence of atypical lymphocytes, indicating the recurrence of DLBCL (Fig. 1c). Intravitreal MTX was
initiated. One week later, pseudohypopyon completely disappeared, while anterior chamber cells (1+) remained (Fig. 1d). Vitreous opacities
also disappeared. Symptoms resolved completely within a few months by the sequential treatments.Fig. 1Clinical ocular findings before the
treatment. a Slit-lamp examination of pseudohypopyon before intravitreal methotrexate (MTX) showing white and viscous accumulation of cells.
b Fundus photograph showing strong vitreous opacities. c A cytological analysis revealed large atypical lymphoid cells, resulting in DLBCL.
d Pseudohypopyon had completely disappeared 1 week following treatment Clinical ocular findings before the treatment. a Slit-lamp
examination of pseudohypopyon before intravitreal methotrexate (MTX) showing white and viscous accumulation of cells. b Fundus photograph
showing strong vitreous opacities. c A cytological analysis revealed large atypical lymphoid cells, resulting in DLBCL. d Pseudohypopyon had
completely disappeared 1 week following treatment The recurrence of PVRL with pseudohypopyon appeared 14, 15, and 18 months after the first
appearance of pseudohypopyon (Fig. 2d, e). An intravitreal MTX was indicated for the management of each recurrence, resulting in the
resolution of symptoms. Moreover, the recurrence of PVRL with KPs (Fig. 2a–c, f) and subretinal invasion (Fig. 3a, b) were also noted (5
times for KPs/1 time for subretinal invasion). Intravitreal MTX was also an effective treatment for recurrence (Fig. 3c, d). Recurrence with
pseudohypopyon was not simultaneously observed with KPs, vitreous opacities, or subretinal invasion. In May 2015, there had been no
recurrence for 6 months. Visual acuity remained at 20/50 in her right eye and 20/20 in her left eye. The subsequent clinical course of left
eye was uneventful. No CNS involvement was noted during the observation period.Fig. 2Slit-lamp photograph showing representative clinical
manifestation of the local anterior segment recurrence of PVRL. PVRL recurrence was observed at a 7, b 9, and c 13 months with KPs, d 14 and
e 15 months with pseudohypopyon, and f 23 months with KPs. Intravitreal injection of methotrexate temporally controlled each local
recurrenceFig. 3PVRL recurrences with subretinal invasion before (a, b) and after (c, d) the treatment Slit-lamp photograph showing
representative clinical manifestation of the local anterior segment recurrence of PVRL. PVRL recurrence was observed at a 7, b 9, and c
13 months with KPs, d 14 and e 15 months with pseudohypopyon, and f 23 months with KPs. Intravitreal injection of methotrexate temporally
controlled each local recurrence PVRL recurrences with subretinal invasion before (a, b) and after (c, d) the treatment PVRL typically
responds well to initial treatments; however, relapse rates are high and repeated treatments are sometimes needed. There are various types
of clinical features for the recurrence of PVRL. Pseudohypopyon is relatively rare and its pathogenesis is not fully understood. Previous
studies reported that pseudohypopyon was treated by a combination of systemic chemotherapy and radiation [6, 7]; however, a treatment with
intravitreal MTX has not yet been described in the literature. Therefore, to the best of our knowledge, we are the first to describe the
treatment of PVRL recurrence with pseudohypopyon with intravitreal MTX. Several studies have reported pseudohypopyon with the recurrence of
PVRL. Lobo A et al. described a patient with a rare and unusual presentation of hypopyon uveitis who was eventually diagnosed with DLBCL .
Papaliodis GN et al. reported that a patient with a previous medical history of peripheral B-cell lymphoma developed hypopyon 3 months after
R-CHOP chemotherapy and prophylactic intrathecal chemotherapy . In both cases, the combination of systemic chemotherapy and radiation was
effective to cause the remission of pseudohypopyon. In cytological analysis, pseudohypopyon cells are medium to large pleomorphic lymphoid
cells with irregular hyperchromatic nuclei and prominent mitotic activity. The phenotypes of these cells were found to be partly positive
for CD20 [6, 7]. A pathological analysis of a biopsy sample from the aqueous humor revealed the same findings. An optimal treatment has not
yet been established for recurrent PVRL. However, the general treatment for PVRL is a combination of systemic chemotherapy and radiation. An
intravitreal injection of MTX and rituximab was recently shown to be effective for intraocular lesions, and has also been used in the
treatment of PVRL local recurrence; however, its application to recurrent pseudohypopyon has not yet been described. In our case, we
temporarily controlled the local lesion with an intravitreal injection of MTX at the time of each recurrence; however it did not completely
go into remission. Comparing the effectiveness of intravitreal MTX with local radiation therapy, the severe side effects such as radiation
retinopathy and keratopathy were observed . In contrast, no serious side effect was observed in our case. Regarding the pathogenesis of
pseudohypopyon, previous studies reported that retinal lesions of PVRL emerge from the retinal pigment epithelium and Bruch membrane [8, 9],
however; the formation of pseudohypopyon is not fully understood. Another study demonstrated the clearance of inflammatory cells in the
anterior chamber using an experimental hypopyon model of SD (Sprague–Dawley) rats. According to this study, experimentally transferred cells
in the anterior chamber were removed by shifting into the iris tissue, and migrating through the connective tissue close to the major
arterial circle of the iris and the connective tissue surrounding blood vessels infiltrating the sclera, getting to the limbal and
episcleral subconjunctival tissues . Combined with these findings, it is likely that tumor cells of pseudohypopyon originate from the
retina, choroid, and iris, and accumulate in the anterior chamber. No apparent retinal lesion was observed in timing of the appearance of
pseudohypopyon; however, the tumor cells of pseudohypopyon may migrate from the retina and/or iris vessels or leak through the perivascular
tissue. Therefore, intravitreally administered MTX may penetrate the anterior chamber and control the pathological condition, and, as such,
intravitreal MTX may be effective for the control of pseudohypopyon. In conclusion, we herein report a case of pseudohypopyon as a clinical
manifestation of PVRL recurrence. The pathogenesis of pseudohypopyon remains to be addressed. Although pseudohypopyon was temporarily
controlled by intravitreal MTX, it did not completely induce its remission. CNS, central nervous system; DLBCL, diffuse large B cell
lymphoma; HD, high-dose; KPs, keratic precipitates; MTX, methotrexate; PCNSL, primary central nervous system lymphoma; PVRL, primary
vitreoretinal lymphoma The study was not supported by any funding project. The case report has no funding involved. All the data supporting
our findings is contained within the manuscript. MK and NH drafted this manuscript, collected the data, and reviewed the literature. KN
critically reviewed the manuscript and reviewed the literature. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. The authors declare that
they have no competing interests. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this Case report and any
accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor of this journal. The Institutional Review Board of
the Osaka University Medical School approved the research protocol, and the procedures conformed to the tenets of the Declaration of
Helsinki.
