Tracheostomy is recommended in case of prolonged mechanical ventilation. Therefore, most patients with an indication for venovenous
extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO) will also have an indication for tracheostomy. We report 2 cases of fatal air embolism into the
ECMO system as complication of percutaneous dilatational tracheostomy. Both patients had an AVALON ELITE® bi-caval cannula implanted
draining blood from the vena cava superior and inferior. Since there is limited safety data on this specific group of patients, a routine
early dilatational tracheostomy might be associated with a significant risk. Tracheostomy is recommended in critical ill patients when
prolonged mechanical ventilation is presumed . Optimal timing of tracheostomy is still under debate [1, 2]. However, a recently published
meta-analysis suggests that performing tracheostomy within 7 days after intubation may reduce intensive care unit stay . Most studies
comparing early to late tracheostomy defined late tracheostomy as performed in week two after intubation [1, 2]. Venovenous extracorporeal
membrane oxygenation (vv-ECMO) is a treatment option for severe adult respiratory failure . The average time on mechanical ventilation of
vv-ECMO patients is 23 days . Therefore most vv-ECMO patients will have an indication for tracheostomy. We have to report 2 cases of fatal
air embolism into the vv-ECMO in patients undergoing percutaneous dilatational tracheostomy while being on full ECMO support. A 65 year old
male without significant comorbidities presented at a non-ECMO hospital with H1N1 pneumonia. As a severe ARDS developed (Horovitz index 58)
a vv-ECMO was implanted via the right jugular vein using a 31 Fr AVALON ELITE® bi-caval catheter and the patient was transferred to our
intensive care unit. Six days after ECMO initiation, the patient was still ECMO dependent (blood flow 3.9 l/min, gas flow of 5.0 l/min)
while on invasive mechanical ventilation (FiO2 45 %, PEEP 15 mbar). We therefore presumed a prolonged weaning and aimed for a percutaneous
dilatational tracheostomy using the ULTRAperc system (Portex®, Smith medical, England) with bronchoscopic guidance. After puncture of the
trachea and immediately after the first dilation step a significant air embolism into the ECMO system was observed. The ECMO system was
halted but air could not be removed. Invasive mechanical ventilation failed to achieve sufficient oxygenation and hypoxic cardiac arrest
occurred. After 20 min of cardiopulmonary resuscitation the patient could be stabilized after implantation of a new ECMO system. Even though
primary resuscitation was successful the patient never recovered from the event and died on ECMO at day 27. A 57-year old male was admitted
to hospital for acute interstitial lung disease. He developed progressive combined hypoxic (Horovitz index 54) and hypercapnic respiratory
failure. Venovenous ECMO therapy was established using a 27 Fr bi-caval catheter (AVALON ELITE®, Maquet, Germany). A combined
immunosuppressive therapy with cyclophosphamide and prednisolone was initiated. After 10 days of mechanical ventilation (fiO2 45 %, PEEP 9)
and 4 days on vv-ECMO (blood flow 4.5 l/min, gas flow 7.0 l/min) we performed dilatational tracheostomy using the 8.0 Fr Ciaglia Blue Rhino®
percutaneous introducer set (Cook medicals, USA). Stab incision and sequential dilation caused minor venous bleeding. The dilator was
reintroduced and external compression applied. Within seconds air embolism into the ECMO system occurred. Rapidly, the patient developed
hypoxemia leading to cardiac arrest. Despite immediate resuscitation and implantation of a new ECMO system via the femoral veins return of
spontaneous circulation could not be achieved. Percutaneous dilatational tracheostomy is a frequent intervention in critical ill patients on
the intensive care unit. In large case series, mortality rates range from 0.17 % to 0.60 % . Most of these fatal complications however were
not directly associated with tracheostomy. Case series of fatal complications directly related to percutaneous dilatational tracheostomy
report damage of large arteries, uncontrollable bleeding or airway loss. A significant air embolization after surgical tracheostomy was
reported earlier but did not reach significant levels in a meta-analysis including over 113.000 procedures . In a recent review, 30 out of
168 patients underwent tracheotomy while on ECMO therapy with a significant variation between different centers (ranging from 4 to 46 % of
all ECMO patients). No data is available concerning ECMO cannulation (bi-femoral, femo-jugular or bi-jugular) . A case of a fatal
complication directly related to tracheostomy in ECMO patients has not been reported so far. Bleeding, the most frequent complication of
tracheostomy [4, 6, 7], however might be even pronounced in ECMO patients due to activation and consumption of coagualiton enzymes, platelet
depletion and anticoagulant medication . In the 2 patients presented here, the air embolization into the ECMO was detected seconds after
dilation with a percutaneous tracheostomy dilator. Both patients were on full ECMO support via an AVALON ELITE® (Maquet, Germany) bi-caval
dual lumen cannula draining blood directly from the superior vena cava (Fig. 1). Especially with higher ECMO blood flow, this might result
in significant negative pressure in the draining vessels. We therefore hypothesize that suction of air through the inferior thyroidal vein
draining blood directly to the vena cava superior might be responsible for fatal air embolism in both patients.Fig. 1Air embolization into
the ECMO system during tracheostomy. The AVALON ELITE bi-caval cannula drains venous blood from the superior as well as the inferior vena
cava. Since the inferior thyroid vein directly drains into the vena cava superior, a venous damage during tracheostomy might result in
severe air embolization into the ECMO Air embolization into the ECMO system during tracheostomy. The AVALON ELITE bi-caval cannula drains
venous blood from the superior as well as the inferior vena cava. Since the inferior thyroid vein directly drains into the vena cava
superior, a venous damage during tracheostomy might result in severe air embolization into the ECMO During the time period between 2013 to
2015, we performed a total of 30 percutaneous dilatational tracheostomy in patients on ECMO therapy, of which 24 had an Avalon elite
cannula. As a routine measure, an ultrasound study is performed in all our patients in order to rule out large vessels at the puncture site
before proceeding to dilatational tracheostomy. Since bleeding incidence is comparable in surgical versus dilatational tracheostomy [1, 10]
it appears unlikely that surgical tracheostomy could have prevented these complications. In response to the incidents described above we
implemented the following points before performing a tracheostomy in ECMO patients on AVALON ELITE® cannulas.In case of severe hypoxia
without ECMO (using 100 % FiO2 at the respirator) delay tracheostomy.During tracheostomy reduce ECMO blood flow (and thus negative suction
pressure) as far as possible.Perform tracheostomy in a head down position.Cover puncture site at all times with wet compresses. In case of
severe hypoxia without ECMO (using 100 % FiO2 at the respirator) delay tracheostomy. During tracheostomy reduce ECMO blood flow (and thus
negative suction pressure) as far as possible. Perform tracheostomy in a head down position. Cover puncture site at all times with wet
compresses. There is limited data on safety of percutaneous dilatational tracheostomy in ECMO patients. Especially in patients on full ECMO
support using the AVALON ELITE® bi-caval dual lumen catheter dilatational tracheostomy might be associated with a significant risk. ECMO,
extracorporeal membrane oxygenation AL: data analyzation, manuscript drafting, primary patient care, artwork TW: data analyzation,
manuscript drafting CB: data analyzation, manuscript drafting CB data analyzation, manuscript drafting DL: conception and design, data
analyzation, manuscript drafting, literature research. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. The authors declare that they
have no competing interests.
