The ocular presentation of Castleman’s disease (CD)-associated paraneoplastic pemphigus (PNP) has rarely been reported. In this report, we
describe a young patient with CD-associated PNP who had recurrent corneal ulceration in addition to cicatrizing conjunctivitis. We describe
a case of 23-year-old male with mucocutaneous erosion and conjunctival injection and erosion who was found to have PNP. Pelvic hyaline-
vascular CD was detected and completely excised. The mucocutaneous lesions improved postoperatively. Two years after pelvic surgery, the
patient gradually developed conjunctival symblepharon in both eyes and pterygium in the right eye. The patient then underwent a successful
exclusion of the symblepharon, an excision of the pterygium and an amniotic membrane transplantation in the right eye. However, after
6 months, he experienced an aseptic corneal ulcer and recurrent pterygiumin the right eye. After treatment with systemic and local
immunosuppressive medications, the corneal ulcer gradually healed and remained stable. Corneal ulceration and melting, in addition to
conjunctivitis, as a complication of CD-associated PNP, can be successfully managed with systemic and local immunosuppressants.
Paraneoplastic pemphigus (PNP) is a new autoimmune mucocutaneous blistering disease associated with neoplasms, such as Castleman’s disease
(CD) . PNP is characterized by distinctive clinical symptoms and signs, such as severe and painful mucosal erosions and polymorphous skin
lesions [1, 2]. Cicatrizing conjunctivitis is the main ocular presentation of PNP , and only one case of bilateral corneal melting has been
reported in a patient with PNP and a peripheral neuronal shaft tumor . However, the ocular involvement of CD-associated PNP has rarely been
reported. In this report, we describe a young patient with CD-associated PNP who developed recurrent corneal ulceration in addition to
conjunctivitis after the resection of the tumor. In November 2011, a 23-year-old man presented with persistent, painful oral erosions
resistant to systemic corticosteroid and antibiotic treatment. Conjunctival congestion and erosion was also present, but there were no other
ocular abnormalities on slit-lamp and direct fundoscopic examinations. Local antibiotic eye drops and ointment were given. Erosion on the
fingers in both hands appeared later. The serum markers for rheumatic diseases, cancer, HIV and syphilis infection were negative. A
histological examination of a buccal mucosal biopsy with hematoxylin-eosin staining showed a small mucous membrane ulcer formation,
lichenoid interface infiltration and keratinocyte necrosis (Fig. 1a). Serum antibodies against desmoglein (Dsg)-3 were detected by ELISA,
but anti-Dsg-1 antibodies were not found. Indirect immunofluorescence (IIF) demonstrated IgG autoantibodies directed toward rat bladder
transitional cell epithelium. The patient was diagnosed with PNP according the criteria for the diagnosis of PNP proposed by Camisa and Helm
.Fig. 1The imaging and pathological features. a Formation of small mucous membraneulcers, lichenoid interface infiltration and
keratinocytenecrosis (hematoxylin-eosin stain; original magnification × 40). b Pelvic MRI (the red arrow indicates the 4.9 × 3.7 × 5.1 cm
tumor). c Histology revealed small-sized follicles with hyalinized germinal centers and “onionskin” arrangement mantle zone lymphocytes in
addition to interfollicular hypervascularity without plasma cell sheets. (hematoxylin-eosinstain; original magnification × 100) The imaging
and pathological features. a Formation of small mucous membraneulcers, lichenoid interface infiltration and keratinocytenecrosis
(hematoxylin-eosin stain; original magnification × 40). b Pelvic MRI (the red arrow indicates the 4.9 × 3.7 × 5.1 cm tumor). c Histology
revealed small-sized follicles with hyalinized germinal centers and “onionskin” arrangement mantle zone lymphocytes in addition to
interfollicular hypervascularity without plasma cell sheets. (hematoxylin-eosinstain; original magnification × 100) An MRI revealed a pelvic
mass (4.9 × 3.7 × 5.1 cm) that was located in the area of the right iliac vessels, and it had well-defined border (Fig. 1b). The patient
subsequently underwent a complete excision of the pelvic mass after receiving intravenous gamma globulin (20 g daily for 3 days). A
histopathologic examination revealed a lymph node specimen constituted by small-sized follicles with regressed germinal centers and “onion
skin” arrangement mantle zone lymphocytes. The germinal centers were almost totally replaced by endothelial and dendritic cells. Blood
vessels with hyalinized walls also penetrated into regressed germinal centers forming a hyaline-vascular lesion. The inter follicular stroma
abounded in numerous high endothelial venules with sclerotic walls. No normal lymphoid tissue or lymph node sinus was recognized
circumferentially. No plasma cell sheets were detected (Fig. 1c). Therefore, the hyaline vascular variant of CD was diagnosed. Then, after
the conjunctival erosion was cured and the injection was alleviated, local antibiotic treatment ceased 4 weeks postoperatively. The
patient’s mucosal and nail lesions had gradually improved by 5 months after the surgery (Fig. 2a, b). Postoperative management consisted of
oral prednisone (50 mg daily) and cyclosporine (150 mg daily), which were gradually tapered. IgG antibody direct to rat bladder transitional
cell epithelium was examined for several times, the titer decreased significantly from 1:320 before pelvic surgery to 1:80 2 years after
surgery, and varied from 1:10 to 1:80 during the following follow-up. While anti-Dsg3 antibody was not routinely tested since it is not
critical among the antibody spectrum of PNP.Fig. 2The mucosa and skin presentation. a The oral erosion resolved, leaving an oral mucosal
scar. b The nail erosions were resolved, and the nail plates were lost bilaterally The mucosa and skin presentation. a The oral erosion
resolved, leaving an oral mucosal scar. b The nail erosions were resolved, and the nail plates were lost bilaterally In August 2013, 2 years
after the pelvic surgery, the patient was admitted to our hospital’s Department of Ophthalmology with a symblepharon of the lateral canthus
in the both eyes and temporal pterygium in the right eye (Fig. 3a). The size of the pterygium, measured from limbus to the head of
pterygium, was 4 mm at its longest diameter. Both the anterior chamber and fundus examinations were normal. Considering the conjunctival
inflammation inactive, the surgery, including an exclusion of the symblepharon, an excision of the pterygium, and amniotic membrane
grafting, was successively performed in the right eye. Tobramycin-dexamethasone eye drops (TobraDex; Alcon Laboratories, Inc., Fort Worth,
TX, USA) and nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory eye drops (Pranoprofen eye drops; Senju Pharmaceutical Co, Ltd, Osaka, Japan) were administered
postoperatively, tapered gradually and stopped 4 weeks postoperatively.Fig. 3The ocular presentation. a The right conjunctiva gradually
developed symblepharon, pterygium and hypophasis. b Six months after ocular surgery, recurrent pterygium and a 2 mm-diameter aseptic corneal
ulcer developed in the nasal paracentral non-surgical area in the right eye. c To date, corneal melting has been stable; in the right eye,
the epithelium is intact, and mild conjunctival congestion and temporal pterygium are present The ocular presentation. a The right
conjunctiva gradually developed symblepharon, pterygium and hypophasis. b Six months after ocular surgery, recurrent pterygium and a 2 mm-
diameter aseptic corneal ulcer developed in the nasal paracentral non-surgical area in the right eye. c To date, corneal melting has been
stable; in the right eye, the epithelium is intact, and mild conjunctival congestion and temporal pterygium are present In February 2014,
6 months after ocular surgery, the patient complained of pain and decreased vision in the right eye. A slit-lamp examination revealed
conjunctival congestion, recurrent pterygium and a 2 mm-diameter aseptic corneal ulcer in the nasal-paracentral non-surgical area (Fig. 3b).
There were no signs of ciliary injection and no conjunctival secretions. Initially, the administration of TobraDex eye drops every 2 h per
day for 1 week and a bandage contact lens for 3 day failed to treat the corneal ulcer. Then, 0.1 % tacrolimus eye drops (prepared by the
hospital) were prescribed instead of corticosteroid eye drops. The corneal ulcer gradually healed, with the remission of eye pain and an
improvement in vision. However, once treatment with the tacrolimus eye drops was discontinued, the corneal ulcer recurred. Therefore, a
topical 0.1 % tacrolimus twice per day and a 1 % cyclosporine ointment were prescribed. The same therapy was also applied to the left eye to
treat a minor recurrence in the left eye. To date, the corneal melting has been stable for 6 months, with an intact epithelium, local
corneal thinning and temporal pterygium in the right eye (Fig. 3c), as well as mild bilateral conjunctival congestion and posterior capsular
lens opacity. A slight symblepharon developed in the left eye. The posterior capsular lens opacity was thought to be due to long-term
systemic corticosteroid therapy, while the IOP in both eyes was normal. The patient was followed closely. Currently, he is on systemic
methylprednisone 16 mg daily, thalidomide 75 mg twice per day and methotrexate 10 mg weekly to treat oral erosions and ocular lesions. No
evidence of tumor recurrence has been found on multiple follow-up pleural and abdominal CT and MRI scans. The results of routine laboratory
testing have been normal. Autoantibodies against rat bladder transitional epithelium remain positive (with a low titer of 1:10). Limited
studies of CD-associated PNP have been reported. In addition, the ocular presentation has not been reported relating CD-associated PNP.
Conjunctival injections and erosions have been mentioned in some cases of CD-associated PNP . As far as we know, this report is the first
that examines unilateral corneal ulceration and melting, in addition to cicatrizing conjunctival lesions, in CD-associated PNP. The most
common causes of corneal melting are infection, vitamin A deficiency, collagen vascular disease, severe Sjögren’s syndrome and neurotrophic
keratitis . Each of these causes could be excluded in this patient, based on his medical history, his clinical symptoms and signs, and the
results of the laboratory studies. Thus, an immunologic mechanism that arose directly from PNP might be associated with this patient’s
corneal melting. However, the exact reason for the corneal melting and the relationship between CD-associated PNP and corneal melting remain
to be elucidated. CD is a rare neoplasm of lymphatic origin. The pathogenesis of CD-associated PNP remains unknown, although several
hypotheses have been postulated, such as the secretion of autoantibodies from the tumor and the cross-reactivity of tumor antigens with
epidermal antigens [2, 11]. Although a complete resection of a localized Castleman’s tumor could treat the disease and improve mucocutaneous
lesions in most of patients [2, 7, 8], serum autoantibodies in some reports and in this patient indeed remained detectable for as long as
2–4 years after surgery without recurrence of the tumor, suggesting that the immune reaction persisted. This might be the cause of the
recurrence of mucosal lesions and the occurrence of corneal melting in this patient. It is necessary, therefore, to maintain effective
immunosuppression for a prolonged postoperative period. Currently, there is no standard therapy for conjunctival and corneal lesions from
CD-associated PNP because of the rarity of this complication. As chronic cicatrizing conjunctivitis is more likely to occur in PNP, Tam et
al. proposed management with adequate lubrication, prophylactic antibiotics and corneal protection to reverse the underlying cause, to
prevent symblepharon formation and to maintain the ocular surface. The successful local tacrolimus and cyclosporine treatment of corneal
melting in the patient suggested that local immunosuppression in addition to systemic immunomodulatory therapy is critical for the treatment
of corneal melting. This case highlights the potential for CD-associated PNP to present with corneal ulceration, which may lead to blindness
along period after the complete excision of localized neoplasms. Systemic and local immunosuppression administrations are essential for the
treatment of corneal complications. Further studies are needed to elucidate the exact mechanism of corneal melting in CD-associated PNP. CD,
Castleman’s disease; IOP, intraocular pressure; PNP, paraneoplastic pemphigus We thank numerous individuals participated in this study. No
funding was received for this study. All the data supporting the conclusions is included within the manuscript. MW participated in the
conception and design of the work, drafted the manuscript, participated in the follow-up of patient acquisition, performed in the analysis
and interpretation of data, participated in figures selection and edition; manuscript revision and text editing; final manuscript critical
revision and correction. SZ and LW performed clinical diagnosis, treatment and follow-up of patient, participated in the conception and
design of the work, carried out the analysis and interpretation of data, participated in the final manuscript critical revision, and
provided the clinical picture. HG participated in the follow-up of patient, acquisition, analysis and interpretation of data, in writing of
the manuscript and text editing, and in the final manuscript critical revision and correction. YH and YL participated in the follow-up of
patient, acquisition, analysis and interpretation of data, and in the final manuscript critical revision and correction. HZ performed
histopathologic studies, carried out the analysis and interpretation of data and selection of histopathologic images, and participated in
manuscript revision. QL performed MRI studies, carried out the analysis and interpretation of data and selection of MRI images, and
participated in manuscript revision. All authors read and approved the final manuscript, and are accountable for all aspects of the work in
ensuring that questions related to the accuracy or integrity of any part of the work were appropriately investigated and resolved. The
authors declare that they have no competing interests. The study protocol was approved by the Medical Ethics Committee of Sun Yat-sen
Memorial Hospital, Sun Yat-sen University, and informed written consent was obtained from the patient. It also strictly adhered to the
principles of the Declaration of Helsinki. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this Case report and
any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor of this journal.
