The causes of cytopenia in patients with severe fever with thrombocytopenia syndrome (SFTS) are not fully understood until now. We reviewed
the bone marrow (BM) findings of patients with SFTS to unravel the cause of the cytopenia. Three Korean SFTS were enrolled in this study.
Thrombocytopenia, neutropenia, and anemia were detected in all three patients. Severe hypocellular marrow (overall cellularity <5%) and a
decreased number of megakaryocytes were noted in one patient, and hypo-/normocellular marrow and an increased number of hemophagocytic
histiocytes were observed in two patients. Megakaryocytes were relatively preserved in two patients. Although a limited number of cases are
available, our observations suggest that both BM suppression and peripheral destruction or sequestration are causes of cytopenia of patients
with SFTS. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first well documented pathologic evaluation of Korean SFTS. Severe fever with
thrombocytopenia syndrome (SFTS) is a fatal infectious disease caused by the SFTS virus (SFTSV), which is a novel Phlebovirus in the family
Bunyavirida.1 The major clinical features of patients with SFTS are high fever, thrombocytopenia, leukopenia, and gastrointestinal symptoms.
Elevated serum levels of alanine aminotransferase, aspartate aminotransferase, blood urea nitrogen, lactate dehydrogenase, creatine kinase,
and ferritin are also common laboratory findings in patients with SFTS. However, the pathological mechanism of thrombocytopenia and
leukopenia in patients with SFTS is not fully understood until now; it is unclear whether production failure or peripheral
destruction/sequestration is the main mechanism of cytopenia in these patients.234 In the present study, therefore, we investigated the bone
marrow (BM) findings of patients with SFTS to understand the pathogenesis of SFTS. Abdominal pain developed in a 73-year-old man. He was
transfused with packed red blood cells due to low hemoglobin (Hb) (7.6 g/dL) at a local hospital 10 days later. Fever, neutropenia, and
elevated liver enzymes were observed. He was referred to our hospital for further evaluation and treatment. SFTSV was confirmed by reverse-
transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) analysis5 at Division of Arboviruses, National Institute of Health, Korea Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention. The laboratory and clinical findings are summarized in Table 1 and 2. A BM biopsy was performed.
Hemophagocytic histiocytes were observed in an aspirate (Fig. 1A), and hypocellular marrow was noted in the BM section (Fig. 1B). However,
megakaryocytes were relatively preserved in the section (Fig. 1C). He was treated with antibiotics and plasmapheresis. However, he died 3
weeks after the initial symptoms (3 days after BM biopsy) due to metabolic acidosis and multi-organ failure. Fever and enlargement of the
left inguinal lymph node developed in a 53-year-old man, and he was treated with antibiotics at a local hospital. However, pancytopenia was
detected (Hb, 12.9 g/dL; white blood cell, 3.77×109/L; platelet, 24.0×109/L) at local hospital, and he was referred to our hospital for
further evaluation and treatment. SFTSV was confirmed by RT-PCR analysis 5 at Division of Arboviruses, National Institute of Health, Korea
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. The laboratory and clinical findings at our hospital are summarized in Table 1 and 2. Severe
hypocellular marrow was noted in an aspirate and section (Fig. 1D and E). Megakaryocytes were rarely found. He was treated with antibiotics;
however, he died 10 days after admission due to multi-organ failure. An 86-year-old woman was admitted to our hospital for a 3 day fever.
She had been with antibiotics at local hospital; however, pancytopenia was detected, and she was referred to our hospital for further
evaluation and treatment. SFTSV was confirmed by RT-PCR analysis5 at Division of Arboviruses, National Institute of Health, Korea Centers
for Disease Control and Prevention. The laboratory and clinical findings at our hospital are summarized in Table 1 and 2. Hemophagocytic
histiocytes were observed in an aspirate (Fig. 1F). The megakaryocytes were normally observed in an aspirate (Fig. 1G). Normocellular marrow
with focal hypocellular area was noted in the BM section (Fig. 1H). The patient was successfully treated with antibiotics and ribavirin.
Thrombocytopenia and leukopenia are prominent features in patients with SFTS. Viral replication in a mouse model mainly occurs in splenic
macrophages.4 However, SFTSV is not found in mice BM,4 but the numbers of megakaryocytes increase in the spleen and BM of mice.4 In vitro
cell assays show that SFTSV adheres to mouse platelets and facilitates phagocytosis of platelets by primary macrophages, suggesting that the
cause of the thrombocytopenia is destruction by splenic macrophages.4 QuanTai, et al.2 compared the BM findings of five Chinese patients
with SFTS with those of patients with aplastic anemia and normal healthy volunteers, and found no significant differences in cell
morphology, cellularity, or numbers of megakaryocytes between them. They concluded that peripheral blood thrombocytopenia and leukopenia in
patients with SFTS result from increased peripheral organ damage or circulating anti-platelet antibodies.2 However, hypocellular marrow with
an increased number of hemophagocytic histiocytes is observed in Japanese patients with SFTS,3 whereas megakaryocytes are relatively
preserved in BM.3 Consistent with these findings, our Korean patients also showed moderate to severe hypocellular marrow with an increased
number of hemophagocytic histiocytes and/or relatively preserved megakaryocytes. The reason for the different BM findings between Chinese
and Japanese or Korean patients with SFTS is unclear. The Chinese patients with SFTS were relatively young age (30–50 years) and all of them
recovered successfully.2 However, our Korean patients with SFTS (53–86 years) and the Japanese patients with SFTS were older (>50 years),
and two of our Korean patients died. Therefore, age and clinical status/severity may be the cause of the different BM findings.67 Deng, et
al.8 also observed that two patients expired of SFTS presented with empty marrow. These two8 cases and our cases (case 1 and case 2) suggest
that BM hypocellularity is associated with severity of SFTS. However, further studies are needed. Considering the results of animal
experiments4 and those of pathological examinations of patients with SFTS,23 hemophagocytosis appears to be common in patients with SFTS,
and the laboratory findings of most patients with SFTS are compatible with hemophagocytic lymphohistocytosis (fever, cytopenia, high
ferritin level, etc.).79 Moreover, one study revealed that increased cytokine levels are correlated with viral load/clinical parameters in
patients with SFTS.10 Since dysregulation of the immune system with hypercytokinemia is an underlying mechanism of hemophagocytic
lymphohistocytosis,11 SFTSV may produce hemophagocytic lymphohistocytosis.9 Therefore, cytopenia in patients with SFTS may result from both
peripheral destruction/sequestration and BM suppression. Based on the "cytokine storm" and "immune-mediated platelet consumption in the
spleen" concepts, some authors have reported cases treated with plasmapheresis to reduce cytokine levels as well as other pathological
immune-mediating agents.12 They reported two patients treated with ribavirin and plasmapheresis and they recovered from SFTS.12 However,
plasmapheresis does not have demonstrated therapeutic efficacy until now. Our Patient 1 died after a plasmapheresis treatment. Therefore,
further studies are needed to define the exact pathogenesis and the therapeutic implications. In conclusion, our results together with other
studies indicate that BM suppression and hemophagocytic histiocytes are common findings in patients with SFTS. Although a limited number of
cases were available, our observations may help understand the pathogenic mechanism of SFTSV and aid in future therapeutic applications. The
authors have no financial conflicts of interest. *SFTS virus was confirmed by reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction analysis.
*Hemoglobin was increased after transfusion of packed red blood cells.
