Background: Obesity management in Wales includes the provision of a 1:1 Multidisciplinary Weight Management Clinic (MDWMC). Strategic
management of obesity in Wales is guided by The All Wales Obesity Pathway and recommends MDWMCs for people with obesity who have one or more
co-morbidities and who have tried several interventions without success, or who have complex emotional relationships with food. No known
previous studies have included a qualitative evaluation of a MDWMC. Objectives: To conduct a service evaluation of a 1:1 Multi-disciplinary
Weight Management Clinic to evaluate associated physiological benefits and qualitative data about the service. Methods: Semi-structured
interviews were conducted with 180 patients attending the MDWMC at Aneurin Bevan Hospital, Ebbw Vale, Wales. Results: The MDWMC supports
weight loss with 95% of patients reporting loss. For those for whom baseline data was available 73% lost at least 5% of initial body weight.
Eighty-eight percent of patients prefer individual appointments and over 90% of patients who see each team member find consultations useful.
Sixty-nine percent of patients report improved health mainly due to a decrease in obesity-related symptoms, and of patients taking obesity-
related medication 48% report a reduction in dose of medication for asthma, 42% report a reduction in dose of antidepressants, and 36%
report a reduction in dose for medication for diabetes. Of employed patients, 30% report a reduction of days taken off work due to sickness.
Ninety-six percent of patients would recommend the clinic to others. Conclusions: A 1:1 Multi-disciplinary Weight Management Clinic provides
value in reducing obesity and symptoms of obesity-related diseases. It also is a treatment choice favoured by patients. When discussing the
issue of obesity “it is said that we are facing a public health problem that is comparable to climate change both in its scale and
complexity” . Globally, obesity has doubled from 1980 to 2008, more than 1.4 billion adults, 20 and older, were overweight: of these, over
200 million men and nearly 300 million women were obese . Figures forecasting the problem in the UK predict that, if current trends persist,
40% of the population could be classified as obese by 2025 . The most prominent serious physiological health consequences of being obese
include increased risks of developing type 2 diabetes, cardiovascular disease, musculoskeletal disorders, such as osteoarthritis, and many
types of cancer . Psychosocially, persons can be exposed to discrimination and prejudice, and being overweight has an association with
depression . The costs of the obesity epidemic are significant: in the UK, the burden on the NHS was estimated to be £4.2 billion in 2007,
and the rise in costs attributable to elevated BMI is predicted to be £9.7 billion by 2050 . Managing the issue effectively is becoming
increasingly important and any treatment drawing on limited funds must be shown to deliver value. In Wales, 57% of adults are classified as
overweight or obese, including 22% in the obese category . While the increasing rate parallels that in most other Western countries, Wales
faces a regionally specific future given that 21% of boys and 18% of girls aged 15 are overweight or obese: this is one of the highest
percentages in the Western world, and substantially higher than in Scotland and England . The current cost of obesity to the NHS in Wales is
estimated at over £73 million, and “in September 2008, between more than £1.40 million and £1.65 million was spent each week treating
diseases resulting from obesity” . Aneurin Bevan Health Board is an area in South East Wales covered by NHS Wales. It covers some of the
areas of highest unemployment claimants, most notably in Blaenau Gwent at 7.9% and Torfaen at 5.4% . The health board’s population includes
areas with the highest levels of obesity in the UK , levels that are above the 22% Welsh national average at 26%–27% in November 2012, and
are likely to be exacerbated by unemployment and social deprivation. Blaenau Gwent Local Authority received funding from the Welsh Assembly
Government to address obesity locally, and one of the services implemented was the 1:1 Multidisciplinary Weight Management Clinic (MDWMC),
which is of interest in this report. The MDWMC in Aneurin Bevan Health Board is the only of its kind running in Wales. Strategic plans to
tackle obesity in Wales follow the All Wales Obesity Pathway . Launched by the Welsh Assembly Government in 2009, it relates to guidelines
published by NICE in 2006 . The Pathway “is a guidance tool for NHS Health Boards to inform which services should be available to support
the management of obesity” . In a broad sense, Level 1 interventions include community-based prevention and self-referral, Level 2 includes
community and primary care weight management services, Level 3 involves specialist weight management services, pharmacological
interventions, and Level 4 includes specialist medical and surgical services (Appendix A). More specifically, Level 3 aims to provide
specialist weight management services to adults who have one or more co-morbidities, and who have tried several interventions without
success, or who have complex emotional relationships with food. Drug therapy can be considered, combined with behavioural, dietary and
physical activity approaches, if these have been unsuccessful when used alone . Aneurin Bevan MDWMC is classed as a Level 3 service, and,
here, this remit translates to individual, one-to-one appointments with a Consultant Physician, Specialist Nurses, a Cognitive Behavioural
Psychotherapist, a Registered Dietitian, and a Physiotherapist, should the latter three services be deemed necessary. Aneurin Bevan MDWMC
has approximately 150 patients in active treatment. The treatment period extends from between 6 and 24 months and is individually tailored.
Referrals are received from GPs, Physicians, Specialist Nurses, Practice Nurses, Psychiatrists and surgeons. Referral Criteria are age 16
years and above and a BMI of 35 Kg/m2 and above. The clinic is held weekly at Aneurin Bevan Hospital and the waiting list currently stands
at approximately 400 patients. Once patients attend the clinic, a nurse takes basic measurements, such as weight, BMI, blood pressure, and
waist circumference. Each patient then sees the doctor and, if applicable, a mood assessment is conducted. Typically, a patient will return
for a second appointment after four to six weeks where the patient and doctor will decide whether additional 1:1 appointments with the other
health professionals are appropriate. Patients return to see the doctor at four to six week intervals, in addition to any other appointments
with other multidisciplinary team (MDT) members, and will see the clinic nurse to be weighed and measured prior to any of these
appointments. Following a literature search on Google, Google scholar, Pub Med, and Cochrane Library, evidence was available to demonstrate
effectiveness of such treatment programmes. Indeed, studies specifically on Aneurin Bevan MDWMC have demonstrated its efficacy . This
service evaluation was also interested in exploring the reasons for any successes. With exception of directly related studies, most
published evidence referred to multidisciplinary clinics delivering services in a group setting—this service evaluation was particularly
interested in investigating the value of the individual 1:1 approach. The objectives of this study are to determine both physiological
benefits and qualitative information, namely patient satisfaction, associated with the service. We intend to examine, therefore: Qualitative
and Quantitative outcomes of a 1:1 Multidisciplinary weight management clinic. This service evaluation took the form of semi-structured
interviews with patients attending the MDWMC at Aneurin Bevan Hospital, Wales, between December 2011 and December 2012. Data were collected
during patient interviews, and recorded on a data collection sheet (Appendix B). A questionnaire used to facilitate interviews was devised
by key MDT members. As summarised in Table 1, 26 key items were assessed. Specialist advice in construction of the questionnaire was sought
from Picker Institute Europe, a not-for-profit organisation that specialises in designing patient experience surveys. Permission to conduct
the study was granted by Aneurin Bevan Health Board Research Risk Review Committee. A summary of the 26 key items audited (and the question
number on our data collection form each refers to). A pilot study of 10 interviews was conducted during on Thursday 1 and Thursday 8
December 2011. Changes to the interview questionnaire involved simplification of the fixed response boxes and separation of some questions
to simplify the process. Throughout this service evaluation: -All active patients attending the MDWMC were eligible for interview—time since
referral was not cause for exclusion.-New patients visiting clinic for the first occasion were excluded from interview.-Discharged patients,
patients lapsing at six months, and patients who did not attend clinic were not interviewed. All active patients attending the MDWMC were
eligible for interview—time since referral was not cause for exclusion. New patients visiting clinic for the first occasion were excluded
from interview. Discharged patients, patients lapsing at six months, and patients who did not attend clinic were not interviewed. To produce
meaningful results a sample size of 180 interviews was achieved. Interviews were conducted in person when patients attended the clinic, and
by telephone. All were conducted in private by a medical student who was introduced as independent to the clinic team, and who asked
questions and recorded patient responses. All active patients were required, for the interview, to achieve a target sample size, though new
patients visiting the clinic for the first time were excluded as they had not yet commenced treatment. All patients were asked for their
consent in order to take part, before the interview, were assured their responses would remain confidential, and were assured that their
identifiable responses were not shared with clinic staff. One medical student carried out patient interviews between December 2011 and April
2012, and a different medical student conducted interviews between October and December 2012. In order to prevent duplication of patient
data, patient details were recorded and cross-matched during data analysis. All patient data was protected using an encrypted electronic
database. Patient details were deleted once data analysis was completed. Data were tabulated and analysed using pivot tables within
Microsoft Excel by the second medical student. A thematic analysis of free text responses was carried out by the second medical student to
develop detailed codes, and individual quotes were identified for illustrative purposes. On occasion, some difficulty was encountered by the
second student in interpreting free text responses documented by the first student. Statistical analysis was not conducted as data was not
deemed appropriate for available testing . A total of 180 patients were interviewed—11 patients declined to participate giving a response
rate of 94%. Of these, 131 were female, 49 were male and ages ranged between 19 and 74. Interviewed patients were more-or-less evenly spread
across the clinic’s maximum 24-month attendance period (Table 2). Length of attendance of interviewed patients at MDWMC. Of the 180 patients
interviewed, 109 had been attending the clinic for longer than six months: 95% (n = 104) of these patients noticed weight loss (Table 3).
Weight loss over various lengths of attendance at MDWMC. Baseline weights were available from clinic records for 124 interviewed patients
and percentage weight loss was calculated. 73% achieved at least 5% weight loss (Table 4). Percentage of total body weight lost. Of all
interviewed patients, 176 responded to part one: 88% of respondents (n = 155) preferred individual appointments and 12% (n = 21) preferred
group appointments. Respondents were asked to give reason for their appointment preference: only seven declined to give any explanation—five
of those indicating individual preference, and two of those indicating preference for groups. Patients were not restricted by the number of
reasons they could give for their choice: 74% (n = 125) gave one reason, 24% (n = 41) patients offered two reasons, and 2% (n = 3) patients
offered three. The 88% (n = 155) of patients who indicated a preference for individual responses gave a total number of 192 reasons for
their choice. “Privacy”, “self-confidence”, “personal issues”, and needing “more personal” relationships with healthcare professionals
accounted for nearly 80% of reasons (Table 5, Table 6 and Figure 1). Number and percentage of respondents giving various reasons for
preferring individual appointments. Explanation of reasons respondents gave for preferring individual appointments. Proportions of
respondents giving various reasons for preferring individual appointments. The majority of patients made positive lifestyle changes since
attending the clinic: 74% (n = 133) of patients said they had become more active, 65% (n = 116) of patients said they had become more
confident and 89% (n = 161) of patients said they had improved their diet (Figure 2, Table 7). Percentage of respondents having made
lifestyle changes. Patients were asked to indicate how useful their consultations were with individual team members. Not all patients saw
each member of the MDT (Table 8). Number of respondents having made lifestyle changes. Number and proportion of patients seeing each
healthcare professional. Over 90% of patients who saw each team member found the consultations useful (Figure 3, Table 9). Percentage of
respondents finding consultations with each healthcare professional useful. Percentage of respondents finding consultations with each
healthcare professional very useful, useful and not useful. Of all interviewed patients, 174 responded to the part one: 93% of respondents
(n = 162) stated “Yes” they felt encouraged to lead a healthier lifestyle and 7% (n = 12) stated “no” they did not. Respondents to part one
were asked to give reason for their response: only four declined to give any explanation—two of those responding “yes”, and two of those
responding “no”. Patients were not restricted by the number of reasons they could give for their choice: 63% (n = 107) gave one reason, 29%
(n = 50) patients gave two, and 8% (n = 13) patients gave three. “Yes” Encouraged to lead a healthier lifestyle. The 93% (n = 162) of
patients who stated that “Yes” they felt encouraged to lead a healthier lifestyle gave a total number of 235 reasons for their choice.
Reasons given for feeling encouraged to lead a healthier lifestyle are tabulated and explained in Figure 4, Table 10 and Table 11. Number
and percentage of reasons given by patients for feeling encouraged to lead a healthier lifestyle. Explanation of reasons given by patients
for feeling encouraged to lead a healthier lifestyle. Proportion of reasons given by patients for feeling encouraged to lead a healthier
lifestyle. All interviewed patients responded to part one: 69% (n = 124) patients answered that “Yes” they felt their health had improved
since attending the clinic, and 31% (n = 56) replied that “No” they felt their health had not improved. Patients were then asked to give
reason for their response: only eight declined to give any explanation—five of those responding “yes”, and three of those responding “no”.
Patients were not restricted by the number of reasons they could give for their choice: 48% (n = 82) gave one reason, 41% (n = 71) patients
gave two reasons, and 11% (n = 19) patients gave three. “Yes” Health improved. The 69% (n = 124) of patients who stated that “Yes” they felt
their health had improved gave a total number of 202 reasons for their choice. Reasons given for feeling health had improved are tabulated
and explained in Figure 5, Table 12 and Table 13. Proportion of reasons given by patients for feeling their health had improved. Number and
percentage of reasons given by patients for feeling their health had improved. Explanations of reasons given by patients for their health
had improved. “No” Health not improved. The 31% (n = 56) patients who stated that “No” they felt their health had not improved gave a total
number of 60 reasons for their choice. Reasons given for feeling health had improved are tabulated and explained in Figure 6, Table 14 and
Table 15. Number and percentage of reasons given by patients for feeling their health had not improved. Explanation of reasons given by
patients for feeling their health had not improved. Proportion of reasons given by patients for feeling their health had not improved. The
most common reason patients gave for feeling that their health had improved was related to an improvement of a health condition. Table 16
shows the most common medical conditions that improved since patients had been attending the clinic, and their percentage of all reasons
given for indicating improved health. The most common medical conditions that improved since patients had been attending the clinic, and
their percentage of all reasons given for indicating improved health. Just under half of patients who took asthma medication decreased their
dose. Over 40% of patients taking painkillers reduced their dose since attending the clinic. Forty percent of patients taking
antidepressants showed a reduction in dosage. Figure 7 and Table 17 show the percentage of patients taking specified medication who reduced
their dose since attending the clinic. The proportion of patients who stated they would recommend the clinic to others was 96% (n = 172), 3%
(n = 5) said they would not, and 2% (n = 3) patients did not respond (Figure 8). Number and percentage of patients taking obesity-related
drugs who have reduced dose. Percentage of patients taking obesity-related drugs who have reduced dose. Proportion of patients who would
recommend the clinic. Of the 69 patients who were employed, 30% (n = 21) said they were taking less time off work due to ill health since
attending the clinic. Only seven patients did not respond. Patients were asked to suggest improvements that the clinic could make. The
number of suggestions was not restricted (Figure 9, Table 18 and Table 19). Number times each improvement was suggested. Number of times
each improvement was suggested. Patients were asked to make any further general comments. The number of suggestions was not restricted
(Figure 10, Table 20 and Table 21). Explanation of suggested improvements. Number times each comment was made. Number of times each comment
was made. Explanation of comments. The data shows the MDWMC is effective in achieving weight loss: 95% of patients interviewed had lost
weight. Two-thirds of those who had not lost weight had been attending the clinic for less than three months and this may explain the non-
losses. Additionally, data was not collected to assess whether any weight gain had occurred with the non-weight losers—a halt in weight gain
may be considered successful treatment. For the 124 patients for whom baseline data was available, 73% had achieved weight loss of at least
5% of initial body weight with 37% achieving 10% or more: this meets the NICE guidelines target of achieving 5%–10% loss of original weight
. This exceeds results from a previous effectiveness study of the Aneurin Bevan MDWMC, where 51% of the population achieved loss of 5%
initial body weight or more , although patients in this study were only monitored for six months—our data includes patients from less than
six months to up to 24 months of attendance. It must be noted that this study’s data includes weight losses reported by patients so it is
possible there may be some discrepancy between “reported” and “actual” losses. The tailored treatment, which is afforded by the 1:1
appointment system, is strongly supported, with 88% of patients opting for individual appointments if given a choice between 1:1 or group
treatment. The reasons for this, elicited by the accompanying free text, exposed patients’ inability to fully address their weight
management issues in groups—nearly 80% of reasons given broadly addressed this with recurring themes of issues with “privacy”, “self-
confidence”, “personal issues”, and needing “more personal” relationships with healthcare professionals. While comparative research is not
available, this preference has been echoed in a study where adolescents and parents attending a MDWMC felt individual sessions addressing
their personal concerns were viewed as important . The individual appointments are a unique feature of the 1:1 MDWMC and are not routinely
offered as part of any other treatments contained in The All Wales Obesity Pathway. Patients reported positive lifestyle changes: 74%
increasing activity, 65% increasing confidence, and 89% improving diet. These figures are already favourable, but some additional positive
responses may have been masked by the question wording: some patients volunteered they were not lacking in confidence or were already active
prior to attending clinic and so could not answer that attendance at MDWMC had encouraged either of these. For patients who have previously
failed to achieve weight loss in group settings, this finding may indicate an attempt to finally change lifestyle habits. Certainly it may
be linked to the >90% of interviewees who reported that they find each individual consultation with healthcare professionals useful: recent
guidelines issued by the UK’s Royal College of Physicians list all the MDT members found at Aneurin Bevan MDWMC as recommended participants
in any MDWMC, and thus echoes the findings in our report . Reasons given for changing lifestyle habits may also be explained by the same
reasons 93% of respondents gave for feeling encouraged to lead a healthier lifestyle: 34% were due to support, 29% due to motivation, and
26% were due to appropriate education. A long-term follow-up of lifestyle change would indicate whether these behaviour changes become
habitual over the long term, as has been demonstrated elsewhere . “Attendance at MDWMC helps to improve health” is agreed with by 69% of
respondents. Half the reasons given are due to experiencing reductions in symptoms of obesity-related diseases. A collective 41% say this is
due to an increase in mobility and having more energy. Importantly, of the one-third of patients who stated they felt their health had not
improved did not give a deterioration of their health as a reason: the reasons were mostly that they suffered from symptoms of a medical
condition which was not always related to their obesity and which could not be assisted by weight loss. Other reasons for non-improvement
were that patient health had stayed the same or they already considered themselves to be in good health prior to attending clinic. A
reduction in symptoms of obesity-related diseases coupled with reported reductions in dose of obesity-related medications, has significant
cost-saving implications: up to 48% of patients taking painkillers, antidepressants, and drugs for asthma, diabetes, cholesterol, angina,
and blood pressure reduced their doses. Although the reported nature of responses makes the estimation less accurate, this could be assessed
more accurately by further study. These figures make some headway into estimating potential cost savings from fewer prescriptions, visits to
primary care professionals, and hospital admissions. It is estimated that, of all drugs prescribed in primary care in the UK, 25% of costs
are attributable to overweight and obesity, and obesity more than doubled prescribing in primary care in most drug categories . As a result
of obesity, it is estimated that 64% additional contacts are made with the GP per year, equating to approximately nearly 12% of all costs in
Wales . In an economic sense, it is also encouraging that 30% of employed patients reported a reduction of days taken off work due to
sickness, given that, in England, obesity is estimated to account for 18 million sick days per year . Patients are overridingly happy with
their treatment at the clinic, and, with 96% agreeing with the statement, would almost unanimously recommend it to others. When asked to
volunteer any other information, satisfaction with the MDWMC is reiterated in the vast majority of responses, followed by the appreciation
of team members in shaping patient experience. When asked what improvements could be made, patients overwhelmingly ask for more access to
the clinic and its related services, which makes for a strong message when considering expenditure related to patient needs. As already
mentioned, for the data, which assessed physiological measures, this study relied on the accuracy of patient reporting. While this may
differ from actual measures, this evaluation points to likely outcomes and may be more accurately assessed by further study. All data in
this study was collected by patients in active attendance at MDWMC. No attempt was made to assess the attrition rate and interviewing
patients who either self-discharged, were lost to six-month follow-up, or did not attend clinic would give a more balanced view of how
broadly successful the clinic is in serving its eligible population. The methods of data collection must be considered in assessing accuracy
of responses: the two interviewers were of different age and sex and these elements have been known to cause bias, but responses did not
show significant difference in this study. It must also be considered that, while the interviewers were introduced as independent medical
students, they may be thought of as part of the healthcare team by patients and, thus, may deter patients from giving true responses.
Patients also might not trust the confidentiality and anonymity statements issued and give more positive responses in order to protect their
treatment. The wealth of information held by Aneurin Bevan 1:1 Multidisciplinary Clinic could be more extensively employed to validate the
propositions made by this study. The main challenge for further work is in collecting the data, as, to date, the clinic has no funded
administrative support and relies on good-willed clinic nurses to do so. More physiological measurements, such as pre- and post-treatment
lipids and inflammatory markers, would be interesting to compare. Cross-referencing of data could explore any predictions for successes of
treatment in certain patient groups, and, therefore, lead to higher efficacy through refining the referral criteria. A longitudinal study
would assess the lasting value of the clinic, which gives the ultimate cost-saving return. It would also be interesting to attempt to
compare qualitative and quantitative benefits of the various obesity-reducing services offered at various levels of the All Wales Obesity
Pathway. Finally, it would be useful to enquire whether any patients taking obesity-reducing drugs reported any side-effects to treatment. A
1:1 Multi-disciplinary Weight Management Clinic provides value in reducing obesity, symptoms of obesity-related diseases, and associated
costs to healthcare services. It improves perceived health, health-related behaviours, and fitness to work. Patients commented that it is an
intervention method that they like. Sian Jones, Registered Dietitian and Sunil Syal, Medical Student. Each author has equally contributed to
the designing of the project, conducting the study, and writing of the manuscript. The authors declare no conflict of interest. The All
Wales Obesity Pathway. Please would you take a few minutes of your time to answer some questions regarding the clinic. Any information used
in this patient survey will be held in complete confidence. (1)How long have you been attending the clinic? <3 months/3–6 months/6–12
months/>12 months(2)Have you lost weight since attending the clinic? Yes/NoIf yes how much weight have you lost?(3)If you were offered, on
referral to the clinic, a choice of appointments type which would you choose?(Please circle) Individual appointment OR GroupPlease include
comments(4a)Please indicate how much you agree with the following statements StatementsStrongly AgreeAgreeDisagreeStrongly DisagreeI have
become more active since attending the clinicI have become more confident since attending the clinicI have improved my diet since attending
the clinic(4b)How useful was your meeting with the following? ProfessionalVery UsefulUsefulNot very UsefulDid Not
MeetNurseDoctorDietitianCounsellorPhysiotherapist(5)Have you felt encouraged to lead a healthier lifestyle?—Yes/NoPlease explain(6)Since
attending the clinic have you felt your health has improved?—Yes/NoPlease explain(7)If you were taking medication for the following medical
conditions—have they been decreased since attending the clinic? MedicationYes—DecreasedNo—The SameNot ApplicableBlood
PressureAshmaPainkillersCholesterolDiabetes Tablets/InsulinAnginaAntidepressantsOther Medication e.g., over the counter(8)Would you
recommend the clinic to others?—Yes/No(9)Are you employed? Yes/NoIf yes are you taking less time off because of ill health since attending
the clinic? Yes/No(10)If you could make any improvements to the clinic, what would they be? How long have you been attending the clinic? <3
months/3–6 months/6–12 months/>12 months Have you lost weight since attending the clinic? Yes/No If yes how much weight have you lost? If
you were offered, on referral to the clinic, a choice of appointments type which would you choose? (Please circle) Individual appointment OR
Group Please include comments Please indicate how much you agree with the following statements StatementsStrongly AgreeAgreeDisagreeStrongly
DisagreeI have become more active since attending the clinicI have become more confident since attending the clinicI have improved my diet
since attending the clinic How useful was your meeting with the following? ProfessionalVery UsefulUsefulNot very UsefulDid Not
MeetNurseDoctorDietitianCounsellorPhysiotherapist Have you felt encouraged to lead a healthier lifestyle?—Yes/No Please explain Since
attending the clinic have you felt your health has improved?—Yes/No Please explain If you were taking medication for the following medical
conditions—have they been decreased since attending the clinic? MedicationYes—DecreasedNo—The SameNot ApplicableBlood
PressureAshmaPainkillersCholesterolDiabetes Tablets/InsulinAnginaAntidepressantsOther Medication e.g., over the counter Would you recommend
the clinic to others?—Yes/No Are you employed? Yes/No If yes are you taking less time off because of ill health since attending the clinic?
Yes/No If you could make any improvements to the clinic, what would they be? Any other comments Thank you for your help in completing this
form
