A key to improving the quality of life in remote communities is the empowerment of children who are at health and educational risk. Between
2002 and 2009, at a remote Aboriginal school, students and community members participated in an innovative, play-based health and well-being
program aimed at helping children to become self-determining and responsible for their own health and well-being. Holistic in its approach,
and broad in its scope, the multi-faceted program encompassed the fundamentals of personal hygiene; understanding of body systems; the
importance of nutrition, hydration, sleep and exercise; brain care; the biology of emotions, with particular emphasis on anger management
and the critical interplay between emotions and behavior; the impact of substances of abuse on the brain; as well as the Hospital
Familiarization Program (HFP) which prepares children for planned and unplanned hospitalization. Program outcomes included improved school
attendance and student engagement; increased community awareness of the importance of a healthy lifestyle; improved self-concept, self-
esteem and self-confidence; as well as increased respect and caring for self and others. A reduction in children’s fear and anxiety when
facing hospitalization and visits to the doctor was also evident. Each year, 12,500 children throughout Western Australia enjoy the benefits
of the HFP. This paper describes the rationale, theoretical underpinnings and the process of the implementation of a play based, hands on
health and well-being program in a remote community. The program was three-fold, featuring the key elements of physical health, social and
emotional well-being and a hospital familiarization program that featured role-play as an important component. The article is based on my
experience as a teacher and principal, working in a small Aboriginal community school in the Ngaanyatjarra Lands, over a period of eight
years (2002–2009). Approximately, 150 students aged from five to 16 years attended the school over this period of time. Located in the
Gibson Desert, 2000 km north east of Perth, the Ngaanyatjarra Lands is home to a cluster of the most isolated communities in Western
Australia. The community is situated approximately 30 km west of the Northern Territory border and lies to the south east of Lake Hopkins on
the Sandy Blight Road, see Figure 1. The nearest major town in Western Australia is Kalgoorlie, 1300 km southwest and Alice Springs, in the
Northern Territory 980 km to the east. The community population is small, approximately 80 residents clinging to their traditional,
culturally orientated activities in harsh yet beautiful countryside (, pp. 9–11, 28–29).There is a shop, a school, a clinic and an air
strip. Ngaanyatjarra Lands Written from an action research/practitioners perspective, this article argues that there is a real need for
preventative health and well-being education programs in remote communities in Australia. The results of the integrated, play based, hands
on program, conducted in a small remote community school, clearly demonstrate how students became motivated and engaged in their own
learning. In addition, anecdotal evidence showed significant evidence of learning outcomes in areas such as health and well-being, English
and mathematics. Furthermore, findings of the effectiveness of a Hospital Familiarization Program (HFP) showed a reduction in children’s
fear and anxiety of medical procedures. An increase in children’s knowledge of medical equipment was also evident. Moreover, community
members became empowered to take a positive and proactive role in their children’s and their own education, promoting physical, social and
emotional health. To facilitate sustainable delivery of this program to a wider audience of students in Australian rural and remote schools,
recommendations were made collaboratively with elders from the remote community. Cultural activities such as hunting, traditional secret
men’s and women’s business, funerals and major sporting events take precedence over education, and the children are allowed the autonomy of
making their own decision about attending school . A death in the community also affects the attendance. The bereaved relatives move out of
their home into a “sorry camp” a short distance away from the community and relatives from distant communities may travel to the sorry camp
and remain there until after the funeral. For a period of time after the death, that person’s name will no longer be referred to and instead
the “no name” Kunmarnu will be substituted . Traditionally, Aboriginal children learn by observation and by trial and error. They have their
own particular understandings based on their experiences, often within a traditional foundation (, pp. 1–14). Aboriginal children also learn
their own limits and they are not disciplined until they reach teenage years. Eye contact, particularly between a child and adult is
considered disrespectful, and walking away in the middle of a conversation is considered acceptable . These are cultural influences that
teachers need to accept and adapt to when working in and with indigenous communities. It is very much a two way learning process (, pp.
9–11, 28–29). The majority of people speak Ngaanyatjarra as their first language. Others are speakers of closely-related Western Desert
dialects. Ngaanyatjarra has historically only been a verbal language but, in the past decade an increasing amount of written vernacular has
been produced in an attempt to retain the language. However, less than 20% of adult Ngaanyatjarra speakers are able to read Ngaanyatjarra,
because it has not been taught in schools . Historically, language is the mediator of learning in Western education. However, in the
Aboriginal culture and context some people rely on observation and approximations and repeated passing of the unchanged stories and songs
about knowledge, wisdom and lore . This practice was clearly an important part of the students’ culture as singing and telling stories in
the sand was spontaneously carried out during the school day. The importance of two-way learning was acknowledged and an emphasis placed on
socio-dramatic play, storytelling, music, drama and art as an integral part of the health and well-being program. The Ngaanyatjarra Lands of
3.1 million sq km have a population of approximately 2500 Indigenous people. The level of poverty in the remote communities has significant
implications for health and well-being as it acts as a hindrance to affordability of nutritional food. In addition, the lack of availability
of healthy foods is profound and the higher cost in the more remote areas of Australia is significant (, pp. 189–218). Fresh fruit and
vegetables are transported a long distance and are extremely expensive to buy. For example, the price of one piece of poor quality fruit is
around $5 and potatoes cost 50 cents each. According to Burden (2001), this poses a serious problem as many Aboriginal children are failing
to thrive (, pp. 189–218). Several communities have no permanent doctor or nursing sister and medical evacuations are not uncommon (, pp.
9–11, 28–29). Moreover, the mortality of Indigenous people is 13 times higher than mainstream society and Aboriginal children are rated a
one in four chance of developing serious emotional or behavioral difficulties . Chronic Suppurative Otitis Media (CSOM) is a common disease
in Aboriginal children . The World Health Organization has indicated that a prevalence rate of CSOM greater than 4% in a defined population
of children is indicative of a massive public health problem (, pp. 177–178). Alarmingly, CSOM affects up to 10 times this proportion of
children in many Aboriginal communities. The associated hearing loss has a life-long impact, as it occurs during the years of speech and
language development and the early school years (, pp. 177–178). Infectious diseases such as head lice, scabies and tinea (ringworms) are
all too common. Some diseases still prevalent in Aboriginal children are virtually non-existent in the non-Aboriginal community, for example
rheumatic fever causing significant life-long morbidity . Furthermore, Princess Margaret Hospital for Children, Perth West Australia
statistics for 2009 revealed that 13.3% of outpatients, and 17% of inpatients come from rural and remote areas . Timmins (2010) stated that
the medical care such as hospitalization and medical treatment may be foreign and frightening for Indigenous people who live in remote
communities . They may fear the unknown; being transported thousands of kilometers away from their familiar environment; flying; dying; bad
spirits, which many believe reside in hospitals; isolation and lack of family support. Timmins (2010) cites the following case, which
clearly illustrates the need for education about hospitalization and medical treatment: A 17-year old boy from a remote community was
evacuated to Alice Springs (980 km away) because of a fractured elbow. I next saw him two weeks later and discovered that on arriving in
Alice Springs for the first time ever, became so terrified by this “metropolis” that he immediately set about finding ways to return to his
community rather than attend hospital care. He now lives with a permanently dysfunctional elbow. A 17-year old boy from a remote community
was evacuated to Alice Springs (980 km away) because of a fractured elbow. I next saw him two weeks later and discovered that on arriving in
Alice Springs for the first time ever, became so terrified by this “metropolis” that he immediately set about finding ways to return to his
community rather than attend hospital care. He now lives with a permanently dysfunctional elbow. In addition, research suggests that for
many young children, hospital admission provokes feelings of considerable anxiety. This is particularly so in the case of emergency
admission to hospital and treatment by invasive procedures. Adding to the child’s distress, the withdrawal of the child’s familiar routines
and surroundings, which are replaced by an environment filled with unfamiliar people, sights, sounds and smells . For some children the
ensuing stress may be relatively minor. However, other children have been found to suffer negative psychological effects such as withdrawal,
depression, aggression and phobias, sleeping disorders, hyperactivity and erratic control of bodily functions, both during and after
hospitalization . To address the poor state of health and the fear of hospitalization, it was decided to implement a three-fold multi-
faceted, holistic health and well-being program, featuring the Hospital Familiarization Program (HFP) as a key component . It was concluded
that the most important principle would be to ensure that the students and their parents were made to feel welcome and valued; that the
school environment was student centered in terms of being interesting, fulfilling, enjoyable, relevant to the culture, safe and empowering.
In 2002 an integrated health and well-being program was developed in consultation with community elders, the Aboriginal and Islander
Education Officer, (AIEO) and the local community health worker. In 2008 this program was revised, enhanced and consequently implemented and
offered to students and to the local community members . The impetus for this health program development came from the finds of Calmas
(2007) who stated that it is our responsibility to improve the social and emotional well-being for our children, families and communities .
Consistent with this view, Burden (2001) proposed that if significant improvement is to occur in the health status of Aboriginal people a
preventative, holistic approach needs to be adopted (, pp. 189–218). Burden recommend that the Department of Education and Training provide
significant preventative health programs in schools as part of the health and physical education program and that health programs are
developed in conjunction with community members, Aboriginal health workers, clinical staff and allied health agencies. Furthermore, regular
meetings should be held between school and local clinic staff to discuss relevant cases and health education within the community context .
In addition, this view was supported from 2002–2009 by the Circuit doctors, touring the 11 communities in the Ngaanyatjarra Lands. They
stated that the health and well-being program should be part of every remote community school’s curriculum. Community involvement in class
activities such as art, music and health lessons was encouraged and fostered. Provision was made for informal and formal meetings with
parents/caregivers who are acknowledged as first teachers of their children and were therefore encouraged to take a positive and proactive
role in their children’s education. The educational task was to enhance the competence of parents/caregivers so that they would use both
their resources and their control over family processes to, in turn, enhance the competence of their child. Health promotion is the process
of enabling individuals and communities to increase control over the determinants of health and thereby improve their physical, emotional
and community health. It assumes direct involvement of community members in the achievement of change. It also involves political action
towards better health for people living in remote communities (, p. 187). Educator Paulo Freire’s (1986) sociological philosophy of
empowerment states that the goal of empowerment is not to achieve power and control over others but it aims at giving power to make changes
collectively . It is a social action process that promotes participation and dialogue between community members. Empowerment encompasses
prevention, self-determination and social justice (, pp. 738–739) giving individuals a greater locus of control over their own lives, within
their communities and in the wider society. Empowerment education can be an effective health education and prevention model that promotes
physical, social and emotional health. It is well known that students who have been part of decision making processes about their own
learning, are more likely to feel valued, to be more self-motivated and engaged in any learning process. It is critical, however, that the
learning experiences offered are real, concrete and relevant to students, reflecting their world and experiences . Crowther (2005)
postulates the significance of a student centered environment with three dimensions: child/adult, structured/directed/explicit teaching and
student initiated . Furthermore, students should be challenged through learning experiences that vary in length and complexity, including
culturally appropriate methods. Given that Australian Aboriginal children learn by observing and by trial and error , the program focused on
play-oriented hands on activities. The program included role play about cultural activities such as hunting, music and dancing, hospital
play and “telling stories in the sand”, see Figure 2. Telling stories in the sand. Seeing family members airlifted out of the community
because of illness was a familiar experience for these children. While some of the children had actually been the patient requiring
emergency treatment, for those who had watched a plane carry a community member over the horizon, where the patient was taken and what
happened during their absence remained a mystery. In addition to familiarizing children with medical procedures, participation in the HFP
helped the children make some sense of what ill community members experienced during their absence (, pp. 9–11, 28–29). Sebastian-Nickell
(1992) described play as “one of the most important activities in a young child’s life”, adding that it is “valuable to every aspect of
development: physical, social, intellectual and emotional” . Play is a context for learning that enhances children’s thinking so that they
become inquisitive, wanting to know and to learn, solve problems and engage in critical thinking. They actively construct their own
understanding and contribute to others’ learning. Children become aware of their capacity to initiate and lead learning, and their rights to
be part of decision making processes concerning their own learning . Indigenous Elder, Aunty Irene McBride (2008), stated that young
Indigenous children should be encouraged to role play more because it is vital to their development as well as to their education .
Furthermore, students who have difficulty expressing their feelings and ideas using language are given the opportunity to demonstrate
understandings through socio-dramatic play . While engaged in socio-dramatic play children’s ability to self-regulate: to monitor and modify
emotions, control impulses, tolerate frustrations, delay gratification and co-regulate in social interactions is significantly enhanced (,
pp. 899–911). Through socio-dramatic medical play, children can create their own world, where they are free to act out new roles as they
master new situations. Smilansky and Shefatya (1990) point out that the roles taken on by children in play are significant because rather
than being the recipients of someone else’s activity, the children are now in control . For example, being the doctor treating the patient,
rather than being the patient receiving treatment. Socio-dramatic medical play also enables children to explore in a non-threatening and
safe environment. By exploring unknown medical equipment, such as a drip or a stethoscope they are able to hold, feel, examine and
manipulate the object. As a result, a relationship is developed with each object (, pp. 687–708), and simultaneously any anxiety associated
with the unknown object is reduced . Gaining control over potentially fearful events may in turn enhance a child’s confidence and feeling of
self-worth and hence, the ability to cope better with medical procedures . Socio-dramatic medical play may also be therapeutic in the
healing process, where children have the opportunity to act out feelings about medical procedures; for example by re-enacting a traumatic
event, previously experienced involuntarily (, pp. 23–26). It is important to respect the integrity of socio-dramatic play by protecting the
children from adult interference, providing the appropriate space and props, and permitting the children to choose and decide how long they
will play ; thus, enabling them to come to terms with reality in their own way and in their own time. Traditionally, Aboriginal children
rely heavily on observation and imitation to learn new skills (, pp. 1–14). Given that young Aboriginal children living in remote areas of
Australia may have limited understanding of the English language, it is important to provide opportunities to develop understanding through
engagement in concrete learning experiences, where children can adopt roles and rules that have a culturally appropriate base. As role play
has no language barriers, children from diverse language backgrounds will readily participate, acting out what they have learned.
Collaboration with the Aboriginal and Islander Education Officer (AIEO) ensured provision of cultural understanding and appropriate learning
experiences. Aboriginal children are used to a higher degree of autonomy at an early stage, and their learning style is based on modeling
and trial and error . Acknowledgement that English is the student’s second or third language was inherent in the program’s design and
consideration was given to the fact that it is tiring for students to translate and respond to another language . Consistent with the
findings of Malcolm et al. (1999) and the Deadly Ideas resources the health and well-being program was underpinned by negotiation,
collaborative group work, problem solving, acknowledgement of the students’ home language, integration of curriculum areas and hands-on
learning experiences. Collaboration with doctors, nurses, allied health workers, other related agencies, families/caregivers and specialist
teaching staff assisted in achieving better outcomes. This collaboration included frequent informal and formal meetings with all relevant
stakeholders. As shown in Figure 3, a to h, the integrated health and well-being program encompassed the curriculum areas of health,
science, English, mathematics, technology and enterprise, society and environment and the arts. Its aim was to increase students’ awareness
of healthy living; promote healthy self-concept; self-esteem; self-confidence; respect and caring for self; others; the community and the
environment. To achieve this, the dual components of physical and emotional well-being were included. Self-management skills, interpersonal
skills and basic physiology about the human body, such as the skeletal, muscular, cardiovascular, respiratory, renal, digestive and nervous
system were taught. Furthermore, simple research skills and report writing were integral elements of the program, which focused on
developing awareness of how to achieve and maintain a healthy lifestyle through personal hygiene, safety, nutrition, sleep and visits to the
doctor, dentist and the hospital, The program was differentiated to meet the needs of multiple age groups and individual students’
abilities. Individual learning styles, multiple intelligence and cultural diversity were taken into consideration . (a) Science: Learning
about the skeletal system; (b) Music: Singing a skeleton song; (c) Science and Math’s: Making a plaster cast; (d) Art: Painting torsos; (e)
Art: Painting a skeleton; (f) Health: Learning about healthy food groups. The daily routine of the health and well-being program began in
the morning. On arrival, the students immediately went to the bathroom, where they had a shower and then dressed in freshly-laundered
uniforms. This was followed by eating a healthy breakfast; oral hygiene and the breathing blow and cough (BBC) procedures. Healthy morning
tea, lunch and filtered boiled water were provided. A 15 min rest or meditation session after lunch was also part of the program. Case
studies were made of each individual child and portfolios of the students’ work were compiled, displayed where appropriate, and shared with
parents. Following are some snapshots of student’s progress: In the beginning of 2008, a year two student who had poor listening skills, no
knowledge of the alphabet, no phonological awareness, unable to form letters and no knowledge of numbers became a motivated and engaged
learner, who accelerated beyond all expectations. By June this student wrote a simple question and answer about the length of the esophagus.
In addition, he developed a real passion for reading and mathematics. By the end of the year, the student was able to read more complex text
and operate with numbers over a thousand, making additions, subtractions, divisions and multiplications. Another student wrote a simple
question and answer about the length of the small and large intestines. Once he had found the answer, he decided to demonstrate to the class
what it meant. Using strings he measured the length of the small and large intestines and displayed his findings on the board. A year six
student who researched the respiratory system, wrote about having two healthy lungs because she does not smoke. People who smoke, she wrote,
have black lungs and if they keep smoking they may develop cancer and die. She stated that she is not going to smoke, because she wants to
live for a very long time, see Figure 4, a - b. (a) English/science: Researching the human body; (b) Science: Researching the respiratory
system. During a large influx of students from other communities, living in the local sorry camp, one of the year two students decided to
demonstrate oral hygiene to the visiting students, while talking about the importance of looking after the teeth, see Figure 5a. This was
followed by another year two student who proceeded to demonstrate how the digestive system works, explaining the importance of eating
healthy food and keeping the teeth clean. He strongly emphasized how rotten teeth have a bad effect on the digestive system, see Figure 5,b.
(a) Demonstrating oral hygiene; (b) Explaining the digestive system. During this time, and in consultation with the advisor and a dietician,
local community members decided to develop and implement a new Healthy Store Policy. This included a significant reduction in ordering
unhealthy foods for the community store, which contain high levels of salt and fat and drinks, which contain high levels of sugar. The
second component of the health and well-being program, designed to support students in developing healthy concepts about themselves as
individuals and about themselves as learners, was facilitated through a series of lessons in which the students investigated the brain
structure and function, the importance of sleep and exercise; the impact of substances of abuse on the brain; the biology of emotions, with
particular emphasis on anger management and critical interplay between emotions and behavior. Informed by neuroscience research and based on
the principals of brain compatible learning , this component of the program provided a range of hands-on multi-sensory learning experiences
that fostered alternative learning pathways to meet the specific learning needs of these students. Activities included: dissection of
sheep’s brains to explore the brain parts that are responsible for balance, coordination and movement; thinking; learning; emotion; relaying
information and sleep; construction of model brains and neurons, see Figure 6, a - c creative movement; music; mind mapping and role play. A
local community member translating. (a): Science: A student explaining; (b) Science: Dissecting sheep brains. The anatomy of the brain into
the local dialect. (c) The anatomy of dendrites. Students explored the concept of self-talk and rehearsed strategies for taking control of
their inner voice and thus maintaining balance between the emotions and the intellect. This was achieved through a range of role play
scenarios, through which students explored feelings such as joy, optimism, creativity, loneliness, anger, fear or despair, and developed a
vocabulary to describe feelings and emotions. Wright (2006) postulates that through drama, where students take on the roles of others; their
social, emotional and intellectual abilities are enhanced . He further reports that role play has been found to improve vocabulary and self-
concept. Role play experiences enable children to develop an understanding that when the emotions are allowed to override the intellect
impulsive, volatile behavior is likely to occur. They learned to apply reasoned thought and analysis to situations to avoid habituating to
impulsivity and aggression and were encouraged to extend this understanding to the playground and circumstances beyond school. By empowering
students with a language to describe feelings, the propensity to react impulsively to situations was clearly minimized. Students further
created a mind map, see Figure 7 a, and learned about neurons and dendrites and understood that dendritic growth occurs as a result of all
new learning. Each student was provided with a “dendrite chart”, see Figure 7, b, on which they recorded new growth when they mastered a new
skill. These included academic, social, emotional and intellectual skills. This segment of the program also dealt with confronting but
relevant issues of substance abuse and petrol sniffing. Animated computer graphics were used to guide students’ understanding of the impact
of substances on brain function, along with an introduction to the physiology of addiction. Cartoon graphics were used to demonstrate the
pathway of substances through the brain to activate the brain’s reward system so that feelings of pleasure experienced in relation to the
substance convince the user to want to repeat the experience. Students learned that with each repetition of use of the substance the
momentum towards addiction is accelerated. (a) Science/English: Making a mind map; (b) Recording of new dendrite growth. Students further
understood that when a foreign substance is introduced to the brain, the balance between the brain’s chemicals and hormones is upset. This
can lead to erratic behavior, loss of cognitive function, loss of appetite, disruption to sleep cycles and breathing. Observations of
students’ behavior indicated that the social and emotional well-being program was successful. As students internalized the hands-on learning
experiences, they became more confident, motivated and aware of their own learning processes. The role play, creative movement and puppetry
activities were introduced to support the concept of “self-talk”, providing structures to help them make better choices. They were more
confident to resolve issues using dialogue instead of fighting; to listen to others’ viewpoints and to put themselves in the other person’s
shoes. There was a significant reduction in aggressive behavior from term one to term four. Students spoke of new learning in terms of
“growing dendrites”. At the end of each day student recorded, on an individual “dendrite chart” provided, how many dendrites they estimated
they had grown that day. In order to reduce the anxiety of the students about medical intervention and going to hospital, the Hospital
Familiarization Program was presented to them. This innovative, play-based program is typically twofold; to inform young children about
medical procedures and to teach them effective coping strategies . It has three key elements: The first is an interactive group session
where children are shown various items of medical equipment and have the opportunity to participate in discussion about their own hospital
experiences.The second element is the viewing of a DVD in which a child, who has suffered a broken arm, is admitted to hospital and taken
through common procedures of hospitalization, including anesthesia and surgery.The third, and arguably most significant element, is free
socio-dramatic play where children are given the opportunity to dress up as doctors, nurses, surgeons and ambulance drivers in replica,
child-sized uniforms. Alternatively, children may elect to play the role of patient or parent. The first is an interactive group session
where children are shown various items of medical equipment and have the opportunity to participate in discussion about their own hospital
experiences. The second element is the viewing of a DVD in which a child, who has suffered a broken arm, is admitted to hospital and taken
through common procedures of hospitalization, including anesthesia and surgery. The third, and arguably most significant element, is free
socio-dramatic play where children are given the opportunity to dress up as doctors, nurses, surgeons and ambulance drivers in replica,
child-sized uniforms. Alternatively, children may elect to play the role of patient or parent. A wide range of common medical equipment and
large persona dolls enable children to further explore the hospitalization scenario through play. In this context, children are able to
express their concerns and fears, ask questions and seek assurance from supportive adults as they familiarize themselves with basic items,
including drip equipment, bandages, crutches, wheelchairs, stethoscopes, X-rays, plaster casts, blood pressure monitor, thermometer, name
bands, books, puzzles and a miniature toy hospital . The pictures below, Figure 8 a – f, illustrate the role-play children eagerly engage
in. (a) The Hospital Familiarisation Program; (b) A parent being treated at the “hospital”; (c) English: Writing a medical report; (d)
Doctors treating the patient; (e) The consultant and the registrar; (f) Caring for the patient. A few weeks after the program, in 2008, a
six year old child was evacuated to a major hospital with severe burns to her body. She was accompanied by a family member who stayed with
her throughout the hospitalization. In addition to being prepared for hospitalization through the HFP at the school, the Association for the
Welfare of children in Hospital (AWCH) supplied the child with a doll, which she used to re-enact the traumatic events of her accident and
hospitalization. The family, hospital staff and visiting AWCH committee members, all reported how well she coped with hospitalization.
However, more importantly, the little girl, on her return to the community, had brought the doll with her. Using the doll, she was able to
communicate her experience to her peers and community members. Observations of the children engaging in medical play revealed that they
internalized what they learned about hospitalization and medical procedures, which in turn will prepare them to face the prospect of medical
intervention with confidence and resilience, should such a situation arise. Recordings of the children engaging in spontaneous hospital
role-play, shown in Figure 9, a to h, clearly demonstrate a sound understanding of the content of the HFP program: (a) The “doctor” tells
the patient that he is very sick and that he needs an operation. The “doctor” explains the procedure carefully; assuring the patient that
everything is going to be fine; (b) “Jack you are very sick and you need an operation on your brain!” “I need to put you to sleep. I will
put magic cream on your hand so that the needle won’t hurt you. Before I count to three you will be asleep!”; (c) “One–two–three!”; (d) “His
blood pressure is fine!”; (e) The brain surgeon.; (f) “The operation went well Jack, everything is fine, but you need more medication so
that you don’t get an infection!”; (g) “I am sure that your brother will look after you when you get home!”; (h) “Make sure you look after
your brain Jack. Remember it needs healthy food and half a cup of water every hour. Now eat up all the food and drink the water!”. This
story clearly testifies the importance of play in helping children cope with trauma. Therapeutic medical play is a healing process, where
children have the opportunity to act out feelings about medical procedures as this young girl did, re-enacting a traumatic event, empowering
her to release emotional energy and gain mastery over that event. An evaluation of the effectiveness of the HFP was carried out in 2003 with
16 children aged from five to 16 to ascertain the effect of providing information about common medical equipment and procedures. This was
followed by a socio-dramatic play session to test the students understanding of common items of medical equipment and procedures. This was
carried out using the Medical Equipment and Procedures Test (MEPT). In addition, the subjects’ feelings towards possible hospitalization and
medical intervention were obtained by the use of a Hospital Intervention Feelings Index (HIFI). An analysis of variance of pre- and post-
test measures revealed a significant increase in the children’s understanding of medical equipment and procedures (F = 16.067; d.f.1 and 40;
p < 0.01). Therefore, the provision of information about medical apparatus and procedures in a developmentally and culturally appropriate
manner, followed by socio-dramatic play, resulted in increased knowledge and understanding. In addition, positive feelings towards medical
equipment and procedures were found (F = 3.856; d.f.1 and 40; p = 0.06) . In other words, the HFP was effective in achieving its intended
outcomes of increasing the children’s knowledge and understanding of common items of medical equipment and procedures and of reducing
anxiety regarding possible medical intervention . Given that the majority of these children suffer from serious health problems and many are
prone to accidents requiring hospitalization away from the community, it is important that they receive a program such as the HFP to
minimize anxiety and possible trauma due to medical intervention . Holistic in its approach, and broad in its scope, this highly successful
multi-faceted program encompassed the fundamentals of personal hygiene; understandings of body systems; brain care; the importance of
nutrition, hydration, sleep and exercise; the impact of substances of abuse on the brain; and the biology of emotions, with particular
emphasis on anger management and critical interplay between emotions and behavior. Collaboration with local community members and health
professionals ensured a well-planned, wide-scaled program offering high quality learning experiences for students, community members and
staff alike. The findings clearly show significant outcomes in improved learning and knowledge of health issues. The impact of how cultural
consideration consultation and collaboration can lead to prevention and self-determination is also evident. The process of the health
promotion program enabled individuals and the community to become empowered, increasing control over the determinants of their wellbeing and
to improve their physical, emotional and community health. As a result of empowerment, community members collectively became directly
involved in the achievement of change. This program illustrates how empowerment education, through a play based hands on learning
environment, can be an effective health education and prevention model that promotes physical, social and emotional health, see Figure 10.
Participants in the program “Tell me and I forget. Teach me and I remember. Involve me and I learn” A DVD be produced featuring an
Indigenous child from a remote community going to hospital. The DVD would take the child on a tour of the hospital, taking in the admission
procedure, the radiology unit, operating theatre, wards and key hospital personal. In order to ensure sustainability the program should be
offered to schools throughout Australia including rural and remote community schools. A program, to be produced, features two main animated
sections. 1. Educating children about hospitalization. 2. Educating children about the function of the human body systems, along with
attention to how illnesses such as diabetics, renal and cardiac vascular diseases affect the body and how they are treated. Publish the
health and well-being model for an international audience, with the view of replicating the program in remote locations around the world.
Undertake ongoing research to measure the effectiveness of a health and well-being program. I wish to thank various people for their
contribution to this project. Penny Bingham for her invaluable contribution to the revised health and well-being program, especially the
development, delivery and write up of the neuroscience education section. Kate Casteldine for her strong support and for her valuable
delivery of the Hospital Familiarization Program. Danella Ashwin for her interest in the program and her tireless assistance towards the
technological aspects of the paper. Special thanks should be given to Dawn Butterworth for her professional guidance and valuable support.
Poul Mathiasen for his continual support and encouragement throughout the development of the program. Last but not least I wish to thank the
committee members of the Association for the Welfare of Children in Hospital WA for their generous support which lead to the success of the
program. The author declare no conflict of interest.
