Lower extremity wounds and falls are on the rise with the demographics and projected aging population. Diabetes and heart disease supersede
cancer deaths. A basic foot exam—performed routinely on patients identified as high risk allows time for early intervention and prevention.
A Certified Foot and Nail Care Nurse (CFCN) who evaluates clients on a regular basis, conducts a comprehensive lower extremity exam for loss
of protective sensation (LOPS) and compromised peripheral blood flow is more likely to provide needed care in a timely manner. Why a nurse?
Because nurses who have the level of education, expertise through acquired training, and are board certified are competent to assess,
educate, provide intervention, and refer. Utilizing CFCNs is cost-effective and efficient. CFCN is utilized as a member of the
multidisciplinary team. Nurses are educators and education is an effective method for prevention. Nurses, as the most trusted health care
provider, communicate, establish rapport, and develop sustaining relationships. Utilizing the Wound Ostomy Continence Nurses’ Credentialing
Board (WOCNCB) CFCN raises the standard of care substantially and reduces overall costs to life, limbs, and dollars. This innovation in
practice improves outcomes, patient satisfaction, and safety while reducing hospital admissions. Chronic costly wounds will continue to
impact Medicare beneficiaries and caregivers until health care focuses on prevention by implementing proactive interventions. Pain,
suffering, loss of limb, and infection are a few of the associated problems with a chronic, non-healing lower extremity wound. Eighteen
million people suffer from lower extremity arterial disease (LEAD) of which many are asymptomatic . Age and diabetes are two significant
risk factors for LEAD. Age, smoking, and sedentary life style increase the risk of LEAD and type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM). Almost twenty-
six million Americans suffer with diabetes of which 18.8 million are diagnosed and seven million undiagnosed. Over twenty-six percent are 65
years or older . The average cost of a foot ulcer is $4,595 per episode . Almost $28,000 is spent annually on each Medicare beneficiary who
requires care, with a total national cost of $1.6 billion, with added costs of prior ulcer care exceeding six billion annually. Expenditures
for diabetic foot patients are three times higher than the general population. Disease, disability, and related co-morbidities are
devastating and expensive. Are they also avoidable? Approximately forty-five to sixty percent of foot ulcers are due to lower extremity
neuropathic disease (LEND) with the remaining forty five percent due to neuropathy and lower extremity arterial disease . Foot ulcers and
wounds are the most common reason for people with diabetes to be admitted and re-admitted to an acute care hospital. Of all foot wounds
admitted, approximately seventy percent of those have no follow-up once discharged from the in-patient setting, less than two percent
referred for off-loading, and eleven percent referred for home health care or a wound care center . Patients’ assessment of quality or
discharge instructions for care at home are strongly correlated with the overall mean score of patient satisfaction . Fifty to eighty
percent of all amputations are due to diabetes-related complications. Amputations are a major cause of morbidity and mortality. People with
diabetes whose non-healing wounds result in amputation have a mortality rate of up to fifty percent in five years, a rate similar to several
types of cancers . Medicare provides beneficiaries coverage for shoes and inserts in an effort to reduce neuropathic wounds directly related
to footwear. Since 1993, Medicare has provided coverage for a pair of shoes and three sets of inserts annually but only nine percent
eligible are being referred for therapeutic shoes and inserts. In 2006, Medicare recognized the need for “pay for performance” for
reimbursement. It is a voluntary program by reporting care delivered and referrals for the Therapeutic Shoe Bill. In 2005, the Wound Ostomy
Continence Nurses’ (WOCN) Society recognized the need for a front-line nurse, to specialize in foot care for prevention of wounds . Diabetes
and heart disease now supersede cancer deaths in the aging population of the United States . This population struggles with diminished
mobility, flexibility, visual acuity, and circulation in the extremities. With the increased incidence of diabetes, and obesity—examining
and caring for one’s own feet is difficult, often times impossible. LEAD and LEND wounds constitute a high volume of service and consumes
large percentage of finite human and financial resources. There is no standardized plan of care for delivering proactive foot and nail care
or an outcome based database to ascertain the efficiency of foot care practices, education, appropriate referral, procedures, and policies.
A front-line service is missing—but what? A basic foot exam—performed routinely and regularly on patients identified as having the potential
of developing an ulcer. . It is imperative that foot and nail care be delivered safely, effectively, and efficiently. The Agency for Health
Care Quality and Research (AHRQ), Institute of Medicine (IOM), Healthy People 2020, and the Lower Extremity Amputation Prevention (LEAP)
organizations have all recognized the necessity for early intervention that leads to prevention—of a potential complication . Currently,
there are no resources available for professionals for the high risk patient population. Though several nurse-led studies and initiatives
exist they have not organized for dissemination as a universal or global initiative . Newly enacted programs focus on preventative care and
help Certified Foot and Nail Care Nurse (CFCN) assume a key role in reducing the costly impact of care for people with LEAD and LEND. A CFCN
evaluates patients on a regular basis, conducts a lower extremity foot assessment specifically for loss of protective sensation (LOPS) and
compromised blood flow. With frequency and deliberate surveillance there is a greater chance of discovering problems. If a pressure point is
identified and the shoes worn are the culprit, the CFCN advises on appropriate off-loading and tight glucose control . Identified barriers
for patients to conduct foot self-care are physical ability, perceived importance, knowledge, education, social integration, risk status,
and patient-provider communication . Identified enablers for patients to conduct foot care are perceived importance, higher risk for lower
extremity injury, positive patient-provider communication, experiences and relationships, strong social networks either electronic or face-
to-face and education perceived as empowering and motivational . By monitoring and encouraging tight glucose control and a one percent
decrease in hemoglobin A1c (HbA1c) results in a forty-three percent decrease in amputation, readmission, and an eight hundred dollar
reduction in health care costs per patient . Why a nurse? Because nurses have the level of education, critical thinking, expertise, and with
acquired training may become board certified in foot and nail care. They have knowledge specific to lower extremity exam and management of
issues and intervention opportunities. Utilizing CFCNs would be cost-effective and efficient . Certified Foot and Nail Care Nurse (CFCN)
can—in 10 min or less (Table 1). Comprehensive Foot Exam. Certified Foot and Nail Care Nurse (CFCN) can, based on the following assessment,
qualify risk (Table 2). Risk Assessment. Certified Foot and Nail Care Nurse (CFCN) can based on the following assessment and risk (Table 3).
Foot Care Interventions/Rationale. Certified Foot and Nail Care Nurse (CFCN) can based on the following assessment, risk, and interventions
(Table 4). Education Interventions/Rationale. With implementation of a nurse-managed safety-net foot and nail care clinic, quality
healthcare services can successfully be developed and implemented despite financial and staffing limitations . A CFCN with the experience
and expertise uses knowledge and a multidisciplinary approach to refer to specialists promptly as deemed appropriate. Delay in utilizing the
team approach is the greatest reason for people with diabetes and others with compromised blood flow to lead to amputations. A seemingly
minor condition such as an ingrowing or ingrown toe nail can lead to a major problem and amputation. Lack of therapeutic foot care and
identifying who is at risk is compounded with falls in the same population, those with LEAD and LEND especially of the frail vulnerable
older population . This initiative for innovation in practice is in direct response to the AHRQ, IOM, Healthy People 2020, and LEAP
initiatives, mandates, and programs. The AHRQ and IOM have charged nurses to practice to the full extent of their education and develop
innovative health care proposals specifically to lead change, improve care, and reduce costs. Healthy People 2020 and LEAP challenged health
care providers to address the high cost of foot ulcers and reduce the costs of lives and limbs lost and dollars spent. The CFCN is
considered a front-line proactive provider in prevention, providing information and incorporating a weekly phone call to check on the
beneficiary is essential for patient satisfaction . Utilizing the Wound Ostomy Continence Nurses’ Credentialing Board (WOCNCB) Certified
Foot and Nail Care Nurse (CFCN) raises the standard of care substantially and reduces overall costs to life, limbs, and Medicare dollars .
This innovation in practice to improve health care delivery includes diagnostics and intervention that focuses on early detection of lower
extremity neuropathic and arterial disease. This proposal is a simple innovation that could have tremendous positive outcomes worldwide. The
CFCN can be the case manager of the multidisciplinary team approach to the prevention of wounds and amputations and ensure alignment with
AHRQ, IOM, Healthy People 2020, and LEAP initiatives. Amputations, falls, and wounds are related to poor or lack of foot care, lower
extremity deformities, and loss of protective sensation. Lack of foot and nail care is the most neglected area of health care in every
setting. The two most important components of a lower extremity assessment is determining loss of protective sensation and compromised blood
flow. Amputations, falls, and wounds are costly in resources utilized, admissions, readmissions, and treatment. A Certified Foot and Nail
Care Nurse (CFCN) is a proactive provider to case manage high risk individuals, monitor glucose control and foot wear, and provide basic
foot and nail care. There was no funding for this review article. The author declares no conflict of interest.
