Authors’ Contribution: Study Design Data Collection Statistical Analysis Data Interpretation Manuscript Preparation Literature Search Funds
Collection Conflict of interest: None declared Patient: Male, 70 Final Diagnosis: Pacemaker leads endocarditis Symptoms: Bacterial lead
endocarditis • congestive heart failure • fever • pacemaker dysfunction Medication: — Clinical Procedure: Pacemaker box replacement due to
end-of-service Specialty: Cardiology Unusual clinical course Cardiac resynchronization therapy (CRT) has been demonstrated to reduce
morbidity and mortality in patients with advanced, drug-refractory heart failure. Procedure-related mortality is less than 1% in larger
studies. Approximately10% of CRT patients have to undergo surgical revision because of infections, dislocations, or unacceptable electrical
behavior manifested as high threshold, unstable sensing, or unwanted phrenic nerve stimulation. A 70-year-old man with symptomatic
congestive heart failure underwent implantation of a biventricular pacemaker on the left anterior chest wall in 2003 and pulse generator
exchange in August 2009. The patient responded well to CRT. At follow-up, the pacing system functioned normally. In September 2009, in the
context of a predialysis program, an abdominal computed tomography (CT) scan was performed in another hospital for assessment and evaluation
of chronic kidney disease. This procedure was complicated with peripheral thrombophlebitis that was managed appropriately with complete
recovery. Eight months later (May 2010), the patient was admitted to our hospital with fever, anemia, and elevated infection parameters.
During admission, blood cultures grew Staphylococcus epidermidis. The chest X-ray, lung perfusion scintigraphy, and CT scan depicted
pulmonary embolism and infarction. The right ventricular lead threshold was found to be increased to 7 volts with unsuccessful capture.
Echocardiography demonstrated vegetations on leads. The entire pacing system was explanted, but the patient expired few days later following
percutaneous removal due to multiorgan failure. In heart failure, replacement of the CRT device may be complicated by bacterial
endocarditis. As noted from this case report, sudden elevation of the pacing lead threshold should prompt thorough and immediate
investigation to unravel its causes, not only the electrical characteristics but also the anatomical features. Cardiac resynchronization
therapy (CRT) has been demonstrated to reduce morbidity and mortality in patients with advanced, drug-refractory heart failure in
association with impaired left ventricular function (ejection fraction ≤0.35) and prolonged QRS duration (QRS ≥150 msec) . Procedure-related
mortality is less than 1% in larger studies , and 10% of these patients have to undergo surgical revisions due to infections, dislocations,
or unacceptable electrical behavior manifested as high threshold, unstable sensing, or phrenic nerve stimulation. There are hardly any
differences reported in the incidence of lead infections in primo implanted CRT systems compared with upgrades to CRT . Lead infections, in
general, are often complicated by vegetations at the intracardiac aspect of the leads including valvular leaflets . Several treatment
modalities are currently available for pacemaker infections such as conservative measures with intensive antibiotics , percutaneous
transvenous extraction , and surgical removal or a combination thereof. We report a case of infected pacemaker leads with Staphylococcus
epidermidis causing septic pulmonary embolism. The patient was referred to tertiary hospital for system removal. He died due to multiorgan
failure a few days later after explantation. A 70-year-old man with symptomatic chronic heart failure (CHF) with a left ventricle ejection
fraction (LVEF) of 27% was treated, after a straightforward procedure, with cardiac resynchronization therapy (CRT) on December 8, 2003.
Past medical history was significant for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, chronic kidney disease, anemia, hypertension, and permanent
atrial fibrillation (AF). For AF with rapid ventricular frequency that was not responding well to medical therapy, a redo His bundle
ablation was performed after VVIR pacemaker implantation on August 8, 2002. Due to development of congestive heart failure with reduced
ejection fraction (LVEF 27%), upgrading to biventricular pacing was undertaken on December 8, 2003. In 2004, he developed intracerebral
hemorrhage of the left hemisphere under adequate anticoagulation. He was a good responder to CRT, as evidenced by increment of LVEF from 27%
in November 2003 to 42% in June 2010. Because of end-of-service criteria of the pulse generator, an exchange procedure was indicated. A few
years later (August 25, 2009), a routine uncomplicated exchange was performed, where the CRT device was replaced and the leads, after
electrical evaluation, were kept in situ. The lead positions are shown in (Figure 1). The pacing threshold was 0.8 volts with pulse duration
of 0.4 msec, and impedance was 480 ohms during pacemaker dependency. Because of deterioration of chronic kidney disease, the patient was
scheduled for a predialysis outpatient clinic. An abdominal computed tomography (CT) scan with adequate prehydration was performed for
further evaluation of chronic kidney disease upon recommendation of his nephrologist (September 30, 2009), which yielded a bilateral renal
artery stenosis (50%) with small kidneys and cortical loss, and infrarenal aneurysm of the abdominal aorta (4.5 cm). His hospital stay was
complicated, after venous cannulation, with peripheral thrombophlebitis of the upper extremity accompanied with fever that was managed
appropriately with complete recovery. Further investigations revealed no other focal inflammation. The pacemaker pocket was not infected,
and the echocardiography findings were negative for possible vegetations. His medical regimen was continued including oral anticoagulants,
amiodarone, bumetanide, atorvastatine, long-acting nitrates, barnidipine, and alphacalcidol. His condition remained stable until he was
admitted on May 22, 2010, to our hospital with fever (39.2°C), elevated infection parameters, concomitant anemia, and renal function
impairment. No redness or swelling of the skin over the pocket was seen. The serial blood cultures were positive for Staphylococcus
epidermidis. This may be considered as a late complication of the replacement procedure itself. Treatment with vancomycin and rifampicin was
initiated. The patient developed severe skin rash with eruptions, necessitating the withdrawal of both antibiotics. The infection parameters
remained elevated. Transthoracic and transesophageal echocardiography (TTE and TEE) demonstrated visible vegetations on the pacemaker leads
(Figure 2A, 2B) with moderate left ventricular systolic dysfunction. Lung perfusion scintigraphy depicted segmental defect of the right
upper lobe (Figure 3A). Plain thoracic CT scan revealed pulmonary infarction of the posterior segment of the right upper lobe (Figure 3B),
as well as multiple gall bladder stones, splenomegaly, bilateral renal parenchymal loss, and aneurysmal dilatation of the abdominal aorta of
4.8 cm. During the chronic phase of CRT, threshold measurements were stable for all leads. Also at replacement no deviations in electrical
behavior were observed. Follow-up (May 22, 2010) showed an increase in the threshold of the right ventricular lead up to 7.0 volts at 0.5
msec pulse duration accompanied with loss of capture and decrease of right ventricular lead impedance (Figure 4A, 4B). Left ventricular
pacing was the only available option; there was no capture possible during right ventricular pacing. A decision was taken to remove the
pacemaker system. The transvenous lead extraction was complicated with cardiac, renal, and pulmonary insufficiency necessitating inotropic
drug treatment, dialysis, and mechanical ventilation. The condition deteriorated rapidly and the patient succumbed. Permission for autopsy
was not given by his family. The present patient developed Staphylococcus epidermidis pacing leads endocarditis late after replacement of a
CRT device with concomitant deterioration of renal function and development of skin rash as a reaction to antibiotic treatment. Bacterial
invasion of the cardiac devices is not a rare finding. Pichlmaier et al. found high prevalence of asymptomatic carriers of bacterial
colonization of rhythm management devices . In 47.2% of the patients who underwent elective device replacement, bacterial DNA was
demonstrated on the device and/or the device pocket. Staphylococci were demonstrated in only 3.7% of the patients who became symptomatic
later . In a prospective study of 1744 patients with elective pacemaker or implantable cardioverter-defibrillator generator replacement,
Poole et al. found major infectious complications requiring extraction of pulse generator and leads in 0.8% of those without upgrade and
0.8% of those with upgrade to CRT . Sohail et al. reported that cardiac device infections occurred after initial device implant in 42% of
patients, and after revision or re-exploration this figure increased up to 58% . Staphylococcus aureus and epidermidis are the most common
infecting microorganisms . The early infections of pacemaker pocket and lead endocarditis are mainly due to perioperative bacterial
infiltration; Staphylococcus aureus is commonly seen early after implantation . In contrast, in latent delayed pocket infections,
Staphylococcus epidermidis is the most common infecting microorganism , as was the case in the current patient. Other isolated
microorganisms were coagulase-negative Staphylococci, gram-negative bacilli, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, and Corynebacterium species . Not only
bacterial infections have been incriminated in pacemaker lead endocarditis, but also fungal Aspergillus infection has been reported .
Moreover, several microorganisms were shown in asymptomatic carriers: Pseudomonas (16%), Staphylococcus (11%), Stenotrophomonas (10%),
Rhizobium (9%), and Propionibacterium (7%) . In patients with endocardial vegetations, Staphylococcus aureus was isolated in 60% .
Predisposing factors for infection include hematoma, erosion, long duration of procedure, operator’s inexperience, and re-exploration .
Cardiac device infections present as local discharge, inflammation or abscess formation, erosion of part of the cardiac device system
through the skin with subsequent infection, or rarely with endocarditis, sepsis, and positive blood cultures . Blood cultures were positive
in only 40% of all subjects . Cardiac device infections may include lead endocarditis or pocket infection. Lead endocarditis may be
complicated by secondary dissemination of septic pulmonary embolism . In the series of Sohail et al., extraction of the infected system was
performed in 94% of subjects . Extraction can be performed percutaneously or after median sternotomy with cardiopulmonary bypass . High
mortality rate (25%) is associated with retaining the infected system without removal . Despite improvement and use of sophisticated lead
materials and designs and superior implantation techniques, infections of the pacemaker pocket or leads remain a serious disorder carrying a
high death rate. The reported overall mortality rate after long-term follow-up was 26.9% . Device-related endocarditis was one of the most
common clinical presentations of cardiac device infections, found in 23% of patients in the series of Sohail et al. . Pacemaker endocarditis
is complicated by a high rate of pulmonary embolism varying from 31.2% to 55% of patients, as was found in our present case. There is
general consensus that once there is pacemaker pocket or lead infection with or without lead endocarditis, removal of the whole pacemaker
system followed by a course of intravenous or oral antibiotics results in a favorable outcome . Percutaneous transvenous extraction of
infected permanent endovascular leads is reserved for conditions associated with vegetations less than 10 mm . In case of large vegetations,
surgical removal of the infected system is indicated . One of the major advantages of TTE is noninvasive detection of a vegetation, a
hallmark of the lead infection. TEE discloses an abnormal appearance on the pacemaker lead in 94% of cases . It has been observed that
vegetations >15 mm in diameter are associated with pulmonary embolic events . In CHF, replacement of the CRT device may be complicated by
bacterial endocarditis. Extra caution should be taken to prevent the occurrence of such a complication. As noted from this case report,
sudden elevation of the pacing lead threshold should prompt thorough and immediate investigation to unravel its causes, not only the
electrical characteristics but also the anatomical features. We are grateful to Mrs. M. Badart for providing the echocardiographic images
and Mr. H. Schutte, pacemaker technician, for his technical support. The authors wish to thank Mrs. A. Geerdink and Mrs. L. Gerritsen,
librarians of hospital Group Twente, for their assistance during the preparation of the manuscript. Conflict of interest None to declare.
Chest X-ray demonstrating cardiomegaly with cardiac resynchronization therapy pacing leads (arrowheads) and segmental defect of the right
upper lobe (arrow). Transthoracic (A) and transesophageal (B) echocardiography demonstrating vegetation of the pacemaker lead at the atrial
and ventricular levels (arrows) and an abnormal high-density mass in the right atrium (arrow). (A) Pulmonary perfusion scintigraphy showing
segmental defect of the right upper lobe (arrow) and (B) chest computed tomography scan, coronal view illustrating segmental defect of the
right upper lobe (arrow). (A) Changes in right ventricular (RV) pacing threshold over time and (B) decrease in RV lead impedance.
