Conflict of Interest: None. Dermatofibroma is a frequent benign tumor of easy clinical diagnosis in most cases, but that can mimic other
dermatoses. Dermoscopy may help to define the diagnosis and its classical pattern is a central white area, similar to a scar, surrounded by
a discrete pigment network. However, dermoscopic findings are not always typical. We describe here a case of dermatofibroma exhibiting
ridges, furrows and pseudocomedos, a pattern which is typical of seborrheic keratosis, in dermoscopy. Dermatofibroma is a frequent benign
cutaneous neoplasm that fits the group of fibrohistiocytic skin tumors.1 Most of the time the diagnosis is clinical, although it may
simulate other dermatoses.1 Dermoscopy is an auxiliary method with diagnostic criteria described for several skin lesions.2 In its classical
forms, the dermoscopic differentiation between seborrheic keratosis and dermatofibroma is not difficult: the former shows the pattern of
ridges and furrows3 and the latter, the white scar surrounded by discrete pigment network.2,3 Nevertheless, the findings may also be
atypical and, in these cases, histopathological confirmation is required.1 A case of dermatofibroma simulating seborrheic keratosis
dermoscopically is here presented. A female patient mentioned a pruritic lesion on right calf. On physical examination, a hardened tumor
measuring 1.5 x 1 cm with hyperchromic surface was found (Figure 1). Clinically, the hypotheses of simple chronic lichen and dermatofibroma
were suggested. The dermoscopy revealed a pattern of ridges and furrows accompanied by pseudocomedos, compatible with seborrheic keratosis
(Figure 2). Histopathologic examination showed a dermal tumor composed of fusiform cells, blood vessels and foamy histiocytes. The upper
dermis was not affected by cellular proliferation (Figures 3 and 4). The epidermis was acanthotic, hyperkeratotic and with keratin-filled
invaginations (Figure 3). Figure 1Elevated lesion measuring 1.5 x 1 cm on right calf Elevated lesion measuring 1.5 x 1 cm on right calf
Figure 2Dermoscopy showing pattern of ridges, furrows and pseudocomedos (arrow points) Dermoscopy showing pattern of ridges, furrows and
pseudocomedos (arrow points) Figure 3Presence of fusocelular skin tumor sparing the upper dermis. The epidermis shows acanthosis,
hyperkeratosis and kera tin-filled invaginations (asterisk) (hematoxylin-eosin, x40) Presence of fusocelular skin tumor sparing the upper
dermis. The epidermis shows acanthosis, hyperkeratosis and kera tin-filled invaginations (asterisk) (hematoxylin-eosin, x40) Figure 4Many of
the neoplastic cells present cytoplasm of foamy aspect (arrow points). Hematoxylin-eosin, x400 Many of the neoplastic cells present
cytoplasm of foamy aspect (arrow points). Hematoxylin-eosin, x400 Typically, the dermatofibroma is an erythematous-brownish tumor of less
than 1 cm and, most of the time, with a clinical diagnosis.1 However, it may be confused with Spitz nevus, melanocytic composed nevus,
melanoma and hemangioma.1 In the described case, after macroscopic evaluation, the diagnoses of dermatofibroma and simple chronic lichen
were suggested. Even with the use of dermoscopy, diagnosis of dermatofibroma may be a challenge. Its classical dermoscopic appearance is
that of a white area similar to a scar surrounded by a discrete pigment network.2 Zaballos et al., in a large series of cases, described ten
dermoscopic patterns associated with this diagnosis.4 The classical pattern is the most common, present in 34% of the cases.4 Other common
patterns are the discrete pigment network in all the lesion (14%) and the discrete pigment network with a white central area (9%).
Nevertheless, in 6% of the cases, the dermatofibroma presents an atypical pattern4 and may simulate lentigo, blue nevus, melanoma and non-
melanocytic lesions.2 Dermoscopy of the lesion presented a pattern of ridges and furrows, classical of pigmented seborrheic keratosis2,
despite its low specificity (43%)3 ; it may be observed in other dermatoses, like dermatofibroma.2 In addition, pseudocomedos could be
found, which have 91% specificity for the diagnosis of seborrheic keratosis.3 Such dermoscopic findings associated with the absence of a
classical dermatofibroma pattern would be sufficient to define the diagnosis of seborrheic keratosis. However, from a clinical point of
view, the lesion was not compatible with this diagnosis and consequently our option was to withdraw it. The histopathologic examination
revealed a dermal tumor of fusiform cells and histiocytes, consistent with dermatofibroma.1 The epidermis was acanthotic, hyperkeratotic and
with keratin-filled invaginations. These findings of epidermis hyperplasia may also be found in dermatofibroma, and their presence may
explain the dermoscopic aspect of ridges and furrows.1,4 This association between dermoscopic and pathologic findings is corroborated by the
case herein described. Although dermoscopy is an important tool in the diagnosis of melanocytic and non-melanocytic skin lesions, the
histopathologic examination is important when there is disagreement between clinical and dermoscopic diagnosis. Financial Support: None.
Work carried out at the Universidade de Pernambuco (UPE) - Recife (PE), Brazil.
