Ovarian tumors in reptiles are uncommonly reported in the literature and for green iguanas previously reported cases include teratomas, one
adenocarcinoma and one papillary cystadenocarcinoma. The present report is the first of a malignant ovarian teratoma in a green iguana.
Complete and detailed pathological features, differential diagnosis and surgical management of malignant ovarian teratoma are discussed in
this paper. A 9-year-old intact female green iguana (Iguana iguana) with a clinical history of persistent anorexia and progressive abdominal
distension was referred to the surgery department. On physical examination, a presumptive diagnosis of follicular stasis was established.
Radiographic evaluation showed a large radioopaque mass within the abdomen, which was visible both in latero-lateral and ventro-dorsal
exposures. Abdominal ultrasonography showed a large intra-abdominal mass, with numerous cyst-like structures filled with liquid and a
heterogeneous aspect with hypoechoic areas. Exploratory laparatomy was thus suggested and the mass was removed surgically. The histologic
findings of the neoplasm were consistent with those of ovarian malignant teratoma. Surgical excision of the mass in our case was considered
curative and after a follow-up period of 6 months the animal has recovered completely. A malignant ovarian teratoma has not been previously
reported in green iguana and should be included in the list of differential diagnosis of ovarian tumors in this species. This report will
contribute to a better understanding of the pathology of this rare tumor in green iguanas. In domestic mammals, primary ovarian tumors are
classified into 3 different categories based on the embryological cell of origin of the predominating neoplastic cell: epithelial tumors
(adenocarcinoma and adenoma), germ cell tumors (dysgerminomas and teratomas), and sex cord tumors (GCT, thecoma, granulosa-theca cell, and
luteoma) . Ovarian neoplasms have been reported in different species including reptiles , but among them malignant teratomas are reported as
rare. Previously reported ovarian tumors in green iguanas, include teratomas [5, 6], one adenocarcinoma , and one papillary
cystadenocarcinoma . Teratoma is a gonadal germ cell tumour that predominantly occurs in the gonads: the testis and ovaries . The tumor is
based on primordial germ cells from the top cell layer of the blastocyst. From this arise the ectodermal, mesodermal and endodermal germ
cell layers . The content of teratomas is complex, reflecting their heterogeneity of germ-cell origin. Neural tissue, woven bone, hyaline
cartilage, hair follicles, sebaceous and apocrine glands, respiratory epithelium and adipose tissue have all been reported in animals .
These histological elements are either seen in associations that resemble normal organs or intermingled haphazardly . Teratomas are
classified as benign (mature) or malignant (immature) depending on the degree of anaplasia or the presence of undifferentiated elements
resembling those of the embryo . Moreover, the term teratocarcinoma is used only for malignant tumors, which are malignant by virtue of the
continued presence of stem cells-the embryonal carcinoma (EC) cells . The current report is the first of a malignant ovarian teratoma in a
green iguana. Pathological features, differential diagnosis and surgical management of malignant ovarian teratoma are also discussed in this
paper. In February 2015, a 9 year old Green Iguana (Iguana iguana) was presented for consult with a history of 3 weeks anorexia and a
distended abdomen (Fig. 1a). Prior to the consult the patient was believed to be a male and was diagnosed with coprostasis. After the
initial examination, a presumptive diagnosis of follicular stasis was made, due to the fact that the patient was in fact a female. Blood was
collected from the ventral coccygeal vein for hematological and biochemistry evaluation, with no significant alterations. Both a full body
radiographs and an abdominal ultrasound were performed. Radiographic evaluation showed a large radiopaque intra-abdominal mass, that was
visible both in latero-lateral and ventro-dorsal exposure (Fig. 1b).Fig. 1Clinical aspects and surgical management of ovarian
teratocarcinoma in Green Iguana. a The iguana presenting a marked abdominal distension. b Ventro-dorsal radiologic appearance. Note the
distended abdomen (arrow). c1 Ultrasonography showing a large mass inside the abdomen, with cyst like structures filled with liquid. c2 A
round hypoechoic mass of approximately 2.5/1.5 cm surrounded by liquid was identified by ultrasonography. d and e) Egg yolk content present
in the coelomic cavity. f Excision of the left ovary. g Final aspect of the surgery Clinical aspects and surgical management of ovarian
teratocarcinoma in Green Iguana. a The iguana presenting a marked abdominal distension. b Ventro-dorsal radiologic appearance. Note the
distended abdomen (arrow). c1 Ultrasonography showing a large mass inside the abdomen, with cyst like structures filled with liquid. c2 A
round hypoechoic mass of approximately 2.5/1.5 cm surrounded by liquid was identified by ultrasonography. d and e) Egg yolk content present
in the coelomic cavity. f Excision of the left ovary. g Final aspect of the surgery The abdominal ultrasound examination was performed using
a Mind Ray DC-6 ultrasound device with a linear probe of 7.5–10 MHz. The 7.5 MHz frequency was enough to highlight the abdominal
modification. B-Mode abdominal ultrasonography showed a large mass into the coelomic cavity (Fig. 1c1), with numerous cyst-like structures
filled with liquid. On ultrasound, the coelomic cavity was partially filled by liquid surrounding an approximatelly 2.5 × 1.5 cm (Fig. 1c2)
hypoechoic mass on the lateral right side and fully formed eggs on the left side. Exploratory laparatomy was thus suggested. Prior to
surgery, meloxicam (Metacam®, Boehringer Ingelheim, Germany) at 0.2 mg/kg and butorphanol (Butomidor®, Richter Pharma ag, Austria) at 1
mg/kg were administered in the musculature of the right thoracic limb. After the intravenous induction of anesthesia with alphaxalone
(Alfaxan®, Vetoquinol, France) at 15 mg/kg, the animal was intubated using a 3.5 endotracheal tube and was kept on IPPV ventilation, using
Isoflurane 1–1.5 % (Anesteran®, Rompharm Company SRL, Romania) and 0.6 l/min air. The laparatomy was performed using a paramedian
craniocaudal incision. Egg yolk content was present in the coelomic cavity (Fig. 1d, e), probably due to the massages that were performed
while the animal was presumably coprostatic. After a more thorough examination, a large mass was identified on the left ovary. This mass was
then removed, after clamping (Fig. 1f) and ligating the mezovarium vessels with monofilament suture material (Polidioxanone® 3.0, BioSintex,
Romania). Ovariectomy of the right ovary was then performed and both the mass and the ovary were submitted for histological analysis. Warm
saline lavage was used to remove as much yolk leakage as possible and the abdominal muscles were sutured in a simple interrupted pattern
using 3.0 polidioxanone. Skin was closed in a vertical pattern using 3.0 monofilament non absorbable suture material (Nylon®, BioSintex,
Romania) (Fig. 1g). Postoperative, the iguana received 20 mg/kg cephtazidime (Fortum®, GlaxoSmithKline, UK) every 72 h, 10 administrations,
0.2 mg/kg meloxicam every 48 h, 4 administration and oral fluid therapy. Several days after surgery the animal was offered food, but refused
to eat, and Emeraid Herbivore® Critical Care was administered. One month after surgery a biochemical recheck was done, using Avian/Reptile
profile (Abaxis, Germany) proving no significant alterations and the patient was discharged after the removal of the skin suture. 6 months
after surgery, the animal has recovered completely. An abdominal ultrasound was performed, with no evidence of regrowth. Grossly, rising
from the left ovary, a well-demarcated mass expanding and compressing the surrounding vitellogenic follicles was present. The mass was
9 × 8.5cm in size, with a gray to reddish color and a weight of 340 g compared with the right ovary (203 g). The mass was surrounded by a
variably thick, smooth and well vascularized capsule originating from outer layer of the ovary. On section, the neoplastic structure showed
multiple necrotic and haemorrhagic areas and variably in size cystic filled cavities containing reddish to brownish fluid (Fig. 2a).Fig.
2Pathological features of ovarian malignant teratoma in Green Iguana. a The neoplastic mass showing multiple necrotic and haemorrhagic areas
and variably in size cystic filled cavities containing reddish to brownish fluid. b Histologic section of the teratoma showing epithelial
cells arranged in cords and islet, multifocally circumscribing variable in size cysts filled with a pale eosinophilic and globous material
(proteinaceous material). Hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) stain. Bar = 50μm. c Epithelial population organized in acini and tubules lined by 1
to 7 layers of cells. H&E stain. Bar = 50μm. d Small and round islet of nervous tissue, characterized by a central channel surrounded by a
concentric layer of epithelial cells and abundant neuropil. H&E stain. Bar = 50μm. e Neoplastic tissue composed by normal and mature
cartilage tissue. H&E stain. Bar = 1000μm. f Islets of chondrocytes focally surrounded by a thin layer of mature bone tissue. H&E stain.
Bar = 50μm Pathological features of ovarian malignant teratoma in Green Iguana. a The neoplastic mass showing multiple necrotic and
haemorrhagic areas and variably in size cystic filled cavities containing reddish to brownish fluid. b Histologic section of the teratoma
showing epithelial cells arranged in cords and islet, multifocally circumscribing variable in size cysts filled with a pale eosinophilic and
globous material (proteinaceous material). Hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) stain. Bar = 50μm. c Epithelial population organized in acini and
tubules lined by 1 to 7 layers of cells. H&E stain. Bar = 50μm. d Small and round islet of nervous tissue, characterized by a central
channel surrounded by a concentric layer of epithelial cells and abundant neuropil. H&E stain. Bar = 50μm. e Neoplastic tissue composed by
normal and mature cartilage tissue. H&E stain. Bar = 1000μm. f Islets of chondrocytes focally surrounded by a thin layer of mature bone
tissue. H&E stain. Bar = 50μm For histological examination, samples from the neoplastic mass were fixed in 10 % phosphate buffered formalin
for 24 h, embedded in paraffin wax, cut into 3–5 μm sections, and stained with hematoxylin and eosin. Histologically, the neoplasm was
composed by elements of all germ cell layers (endoderm, mesoderm and ectoderm), haphazardly arranged within the mass. I) Endoderm: Two
different epithelial populations were present in the sample. The first one was composed by pleomorphic epithelial cells arranged in cords
and islets, multifocally circumscribing variable in size cysts filled with a pale eosinophilic and globous material (proteinaceous material)
(Fig. 2b). The cells were cuboidal to polygonal or oval, 30 to 40μm in width, with indistinct cells borders and with an intermediate to high
nucleo-cytoplasmic (N/C) ratio. The cytoplasm was moderate in amount, clear and with multiple and variable in size eosinophilic and
amorphous granules. The nuclei were large, central to paracentral with a vesicular chromatin and a single nucleolus. Anisokaryosis and
anysocytosis were severe with karyomegaly and moderate numbers of mitotic figures. Cytological characteristics were compatible with atypical
granulosa cells. Multifocally, admixed to the neoplastic granulosa cells, numerous polygonal cells of 10–12 μm in diameter, with a pale and
homogeneous eosinophilic cytoplasm and a small, round and central nucleus were identified (intermediate cells of the follicle wall). The
second epithelial population was organized in acini and tubules lined by 1 to 7 layers of cells (Fig. 2c). The cells were cuboidal to
cylindrical, 10–15 μm in diameter, with indistinct cells border and with an intermediate N/C ratio. The cytoplasm was moderate, pale
eosinophilic, homogeneous and with an apical brush border. The nuclei were large, round to oval with lacy reticular chromatin. Randomly, a
single 2–4 μm in width, eosinophilic nucleolus was detected. Anisokaryosis and anysocytosis were moderate and mitoses were also rare. The
lumen of the acini was partially filled with mucus. These epithelial structures could have corresponding to tissue from the respiratory or
the genital tract. Multiple small areas of necrosis within the epithelial cell population were identified. II) Ectoderm: A lesser part of
the tumor was composed by small and round islet of nervous tissue, characterized by a central channel surrounded by a concentric layer of
epithelial cells (ependymal channel) and abundant neuropil (Fig. 2d). III) Mesoderm: Remaining neoplastic tissue was composed by mature
hyaline cartilage (Fig. 2e), organized in variably in size islets of chondrocytes focally surrounded by a thin layer of mature bone
(Fig. 2f) and scattered foci of striated muscle tissue. All mesenchymal tissues were well differentiated. According to the largest
retrospective publication to date regarding the prevalence of neoplasia in reptiles , the tumors are most frequently in snakes, followed by
lizards, chelonians, and crocodilians. Although most gonadal and extragonadal teratomas from animals are benign, malignant teratomas have
also been recorded . Histologically, malignant teratomas contain less well-differentiated embryonal elements in addition to mature
structures, increased cellular atypia and numerous mitotic figures . Multicentric growth secondary to direct implantation or distant
metastases represent other features of malignant teratoma . In the present case, only the endodermal layer showed characteristic features of
malignancy characterized by cellular atypia, anysokariosis, karyomegaly, mitoses and necrosis. Yolk coeliomitis may be the result of yolks
being released from the reproductive tract into coelomic cavity or rupture of follicles while still on the ovary . In our case, yolk
coeliomitis was caused by rupture of the follicles due to the pressure put on the abdomen while there was a coprostasis suspition. Iguana
ovarian tissue is diffuse and intimately associated with the vena cava and adrenal gland and this makes oophorectomy technically
challenging. If the procedure is incomplete, even small remnants will regrow and folliculogenesis will develop . The use of hemostatic clips
and microsurgical instruments in complete ovarian removal in reptiles is well known. In this reported case the bilateral oophorectomy was
performed using microsurgical instruments and monofilament absorbable suture material. Six months later, the patient has recovered
completely with no signs of ovarian regrowth. To our knowledge, this is the first reported case of malignant ovarian teratoma described
antemortem in green iguana (Iguana iguana). In our opinion the condition should be included in the list of differential diagnosis of ovarian
and other intra-abdominal tumors in this species. GCT, granulosa cell tumor This paper was published under the frame of European Social
Fund, Human Resources Development Operational Programme 2007–2013, project no. POSDRU/159/1.5/S/136893. Our findings are contained within
the manuscript. LB performed the surgery and helped to draft the manuscript. MTe performed the data analysis and interpretation. GB and MTa
carried out the histopathological data analysis and revised the manuscript. CP carried out the anesthesia. RP performed diagnostic imaging
examination and participated in the manuscript design. CO participated in the design of the study and drafted the manuscript. LO helped in
case surgical management and revised the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. The authors declare that they have
no competing interests. Not applicable. The local ethics committee ruled that no formal ethics approval was required in this particular
case.
