Rosai–Dorfman disease was commonly characterized as massive, painless, bilateral, symmetric cervical lymphadenopathy, with fever,
leukocytosis, and elevated sedimentation rate. However, soft tissue Rosai–Dorfman disease (STRDD) is a rare benign tumor. We hereby present
1 case of a 17-month-old girl, an isolated subcutaneous mass was detected on her right forearm, and no signs of pain, swelling, or erythema
were observed at the site. The patient underwent an excisional biopsy for the mass. Immunohistochemistry results showed that it was positive
for S-100 protein and CD68, whereas negative for CD1a, which supported the diagnosis of STRDD. Conclusions: The patient showed no evidence
of recurrence or metastasis 2 years after the surgery. Some multifocal masses were reported to be much more prone to recurrence. Further
follow-up of STRDD is necessary. Sinus histiocytosis with massive lymphadenopathy (SHML), also known proverbially as Rosai-Dorfman disease
(RDD), was first described by Rosai and Dorfman in 1969, which was commonly characterized as massive, painless, bilateral, symmetric
cervical lymphadenopathy, with fever, leukocytosis, elevated sedimentation rate, and hyper-γ-globulinemia. Immunophenotypic studies have
supported the interpretation that RDD cells were part of the mononuclear phagocyte and immunoregulatory effector system, belonging to the
macrophage/histiocytic family. Found worldwide and affecting individuals predominantly with mean onset age of 20.6 years, RDD is slightly
more common in men (1.4:1) and is significantly more common among whites and blacks than Asians. Extranodal sites are often involved with
skin, central nervous system, upper respiratory system, long bones, and soft tissue (43% of cases in registry database). Deeply soft tissue
Rosai-Dorfman disease (STRDD) is rare, with sporadic cases previously reported in no >3% patients. The ethics committee of the Shanghai
children's Medical Center reviewed and approved this study. Written, informed consent was obtained from the patients. We hereby report one
case of RDD on the forearm and review the literature. A 17-month-old girl was admitted into our hospital for an isolated subcutaneous nodule
(mass) on the right forearm, no signs of pain, swelling, or erythema were observed at the site, and it was enlarging gradually in the recent
3 months. The girl was born in Shanghai and was usually healthy. Physical examination on admission showed an isolated superficial
2.0 × 1.5 cm soft tissue mass on distal right forearm, it was soft, movable; and nontender, full-range movement was observed on the elbow
and wrist. Results of laboratory tests were as follows: peripheral while blood cell count 7.9 × 109 cells/L, serum C-reactive protein (CRP)
<1 mg/L, and erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) 12 mm/hour, without any abnormal findings. Human herpesvirus-6 (HHV-6)-specific DNA
sequences by PCR test was also negative. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan (slice 30. thickness 5.0 mm, gap 1.0 mm) of the mass showed
medial signal intensity on T1-weighted (TR/TE 450/35 ms) and high signal intensity on T2-weighted images (TR/TE 2500/100 ms), with strong
enhancement after injection of gadolinium contrast agent. However, fat-suppressed showed high signal intensity on T1-weighted and high
signal intensity on T2-weighted images, with strong enhancement after the injection of gadolinium contrast agent (Fig. 1 A–C. MRI of STRDD.
(A) Note that lesion has a low signal intensity on T1-weighted image. (B) High signal intensity on T2-weighted MRI. (C) After injection of
gadolinium contrast agent, a strong enhancement can be noted. The patient underwent an excisional biopsy followed by pathologic examination
on day 3 after hospitalization. The lesion was soft tissue in size of 1.5 × 0.8 × 0.5 cm, with irregular shape in tan-pale color (Fig. 2AA).
Histologically, sections of HE stain showed a diffused infiltration of large histiocytes, lymphocytes, and plasma cells with scattered
neutrophils. The histiocytes showed abundant pale eosinophilic cytoplasm and mildly atypical round vesicular nuclei. Immunohistochemical
results were positive for S-100 protein, CD68, and negative for CD1a (Fig. 2B, C, D). Moreover, immunohistochemical stains for monoclonal
cytokeratin 7, cytokeratin 20, epithelial membrane antigen (EMA), myeloperoxidase (MPO), calretinin, mesothelial cell, actin, desmin, human
melanoma black-45 (HMB-45), melanoma, CD3, CD15, CD30, CD31, and anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK) were all negative. Notably, lymphocyte
phagocytosis (emperipolesis) was detected (Fig. 2E). Note that a Grossly STRDD lesion was tan-pale and soft, circumscribed and subcutaneoust
(A). The histocytes of STRDD are immunohistochemically positive for S-100 protein and CD68, and negative for CD1a (B, C, D ×200).
Additionally, lymphocyte phagocytosis (emperipolesis) is noted (arrow, E ×200). The patient was diagnosed as having STRDD of the forearm and
was discharged from hospital on day 4 after the surgery. The girl has been followed up for 2 years and no recurrence or metastasis has been
observed. Until now, no >1000 RDD cases have been reported in English journals. It is often accumulated in extranodal sites including the
orbit, eyelid, skin, bone, central nervous system, and soft tissues. However, simple soft tissue manifestation of RDD (without
lymphadenopathy or other systemic symptoms) is rarely seen, which occurs in <3% of patients. STRDD is primarily found in trunk and proximal
extremities as a rapidly evolutional entity. On occasion, it manifests as a multifocal and persistent disease. Although RDD is slightly more
common in men, STRDD has a female sex predominance of nearly 3:1, also with a broader size range and a wider age range, which was supported
by previous literatures. The study of Al-Daraji et al showed that multifocal STRDD was much more prone to recurrence. Owing to its low
incidence, there was no difference in recurrence between males and females. Our patient, with an isolated mass on the forearm, has been
followed up for 2 years postoperatively, without any sign of recurrence. To our knowledge, this is the first case report of STRDD located on
the forearm in children. Laboratory tests and radiograph results were unremarkable. Noguchi et al reported that patients of RDD might show
slight elevation of CRP and ESR. However, such results were not observed in our case. Laboratory parameters may show nonspecific increase in
RDD, which was reported by a previous literature. The diagnosis of STRDD is mainly confirmed by pathological examinations. Specimens are
mainly obtained by open surgical biopsy or fine needle aspiration. In general, histopathological inspection markedly shows a large number of
mixed cell population, including mature plasma cells and lymphocytes. The most typical cells are histiocytes of accentuated phagocytic
appearance. The most useful markers of histiocytes in RDD are positive for S-100 protein and CD68, and negative for CD1a. In our case,
immunohistochemical stains for monoclonal cytokeratin 7, EMA, MOP, calretinin, mesothelial cell, actin, desmin, HMB-45, melanoma, CD3, CD15,
CD30, CD31, and ALK were all negative. Lippi et al showed the presence of HHV-6-specific DNA within histiocytes of some RDD patients, which
therefore indicated that Epstein–Barr virus (EBV) might play a role in the onset of RDD. However, HHV-6 is so commonly present in lymphoid
tissue that significance of this finding remains dubious. HHV-6-specific DNA test by PCR was also negative in our case. Differential
diagnosis of RDD includes histiocytosis of Langerhans cells, histiocytic sarcoma, lysosomal storage diseases (eg, Gaucher disease),
classical Hodgkin lymphoma, melanoma and metastatic carcinomas, and infections caused by Histoplasma and mycobacteria involving lymph nodes.
Immunohistochemical staining for S-100 and CD68 is helpful in distinguishing RDD from diseases mentioned above. Owing to its low incidence,
no ideal or standard treatment has been defined for STRDD. The predilection sites of the lesion and its self-limiting nature also make the
majority of RDD patients not necessary to be intervened. Nevertheless, the course of RDD is still unpredictable. When vital organs are
involved, interventions proposed by previous literatures include corticosteroids administration, chemotherapy, radiotherapy, and surgical
resection, but their efficacy remains uncertain. In our case, the girl has been followed up for 2 years after the surgery and no recurrence
has been observed. In conclusion, we presented a rare case of STRDD in children. Simple STRDD is an unknown benign neoplasm and is mainly
confirmed by pathological examinations, showing positive for S-100 protein and CD68, and negative for CD1a. Furthermore, follow-up of STRDD
is necessary. Abbreviations: ALK = anaplastic lymphoma kinase, CRP = C-reactive protein, EBV = Epstein-Barr virus, EMA = epithelial membrane
antigen, ESR = erythrocyte sedimentation rate, HHV-6 = human herpesvirus-6, HMB-45 = human melanoma black-45, MPO = myeloperoxidase, MRI =
magnetic resonance imaging, RDD = Rosai–Dorfman disease, STRDD = soft tissue Rosai–Dorfman disease. YX and BH contributed to the work
equally and should be regarded as co-first authors. The authors report no conflicts of interest.
