Diffuse dermal angiomatosis (DDA) is a rare, acquired, reactive vascular proliferation, clinically characterized by livedoid
erythematous–violaceous plaques, which frequently evolve to ulceration and necrosis. Histopathologically, it is manifested by a diffuse
proliferation of endothelial cells within the full thickness of the dermis. DDA has been mainly associated with severe peripheral
atherosclerosis. We report a 63-year-old woman who presented with multiple erythematous–violaceous plaques with central deep skin ulcers on
thighs, lower abdomen, and perianal area, associated with intermittent claudication, low-grade fever, and weight loss. Initially, the
clinical picture along with positive cultures for Klebsiella pneumoniae suggested a multifocal ecthyma gangrenosum; nevertheless, a skin
biopsy showed a diffuse dermal proliferation of endothelial cells interstitially arranged between collagen bundles. A computed tomography
scan revealed severe aortic atheromatosis with complete luminal occlusion of the infrarenal aorta and common iliac arteries. The diagnosis
of DDA secondary to severe atherosclerosis was established. The patient underwent a left axillofemoral bypass surgery with a rapidly healing
of the ulcers in the next weeks. DDA should be considered in the differential diagnosis of livedoid ischemic lesions. Recognition of DDA as
a cutaneous sign of severe peripheral vascular disease is important for both dermatologists and internists. Recognition of risk factors and
their management with an early intervention to correct tissue ischemia can be curative. Diffuse dermal angiomatosis (DDA) is an unusual
variant of cutaneous reactive angiomatoses (CRA), a group of benign vascular disorders characterized clinically by multiple, skin ulcers,
developing on livedoid erythematous–violaceous plaques, often arising in nonacral areas. Histologically DDA is usually characterized by a
diffuse dermal proliferation of endothelial cells and pericytes. The pathogenic mechanisms are not fully understood but it is thought to
correspond to a reactive process secondary to an underlying vascular occlusion. We report a case of DDA related to peripheral vascular
atherosclerotic disease with successful evolution after revascularization. In April 2015, a 63-year-old woman presented to our department
for evaluation of persistent multiple painful deep skin ulcers on the inner aspects of both thighs, lower abdomen, and perianal area that
had appeared 1 month before consultation. The development of these lesions was associated with intense pain, low-grade fever, and discrete
weight loss (6 kg). Over the past 2 months the patient also referred progressive intermittent claudication of both legs. Her medical history
was significant for heavy smoking, arterial hypertension, and dyslipidemia treated with enalapril and simvastatin. Physical examination
disclosed multiple irregularly shaped retiform erythematous–violaceous and purpuric plaques with central deep skin ulcers of undermined
edges, ranging from 2 to 5 cm in diameter (Fig. 1). No peripheral pulses were noted in both lower extremities. No enlarged lymph nodes or
signs of chronic venous insufficiency were detected. Laboratory test showed an increased leukocyte count (13.5×109/L) with neutrophilia
(60%) and raised C-reactive protein levels (11 mg/L). The rest of hematological, biochemical, and immunological surveys disclosed no
abnormalities. A complete thrombophilic evaluation including lupus anticoagulant, anticardiolipin antibodies, Leiden factor V, proteins S
and C, antithrombin III, antiphospholipid antibodies, cryoglobulin, fibrin degradation products, and D-dimer failed to detect any
abnormality. (A and B) Retiform erythematous–violaceous plaques with central deep skin ulcers. A bacteriological culture from a 4-mm biopsy
specimen obtained from the cutaneous ulcers isolated Klebsiella pneumoniae, suggesting multifocal ecthyma gangrenosum as a possible
diagnosis. Antibiotic therapy with clindamycin and ciprofloxacin was prescribed without significant improvement. After this treatment,
bacteriological cultures yielded negative results. A biopsy specimen obtained from the abdominal erythematous plaque revealed a diffuse
dermal proliferation of endothelial cells interstitially arranged between the collagen bundles involving the full dermal thickness. The
proliferating cells stained positively with vascular markers CD31 and CD34 and negatively for HHV-8 and D2.40 (Fig. 2). A CT scan revealed
severe aortic atheromatosis with complete luminal occlusion of the infrarenal aorta and common iliac arteries (Fig. 3A). Digital subtraction
angiography (DSA) confirmed a complete aortic occlusion immediately below the renal arteries and also a complete occlusion of both iliac
arteries with bilateral patent common, deep femoral and proximal superficial femoral arteries. The diagnosis of DDA secondary to severe
atherosclerosis was established. (A) Diffuse proliferation of endothelial cells involving the full dermal thickness, HE 40×. (B) Endothelial
cells interstitially arranged between the collagen bundles, HE 100×. (C) The specimen was positive for CD34, stain at 200×. CD34 = cluster
of differentiation 34, HE = hematoxylin and eosin. (A) CT scan showing total aortic occlusion below the renal arteries. (B) Healing of the
ulcers after axillofemoral bypass surgery. CT = computed tomography. Patient's ulcers continued to rapidly grow despite strict control of
cardiovascular risk factors, daily treatment with 100 mg of acetyl salicylic acid and intensive local care. Despite the surgical risk, the
patient underwent a left axillofemoral bypass surgery with a rapidly healing of the ulcers within 3 weeks after surgical intervention. The
erythematous plaques took longer to be solved (Fig. 3B). CRA are a group of benign vascular disorders characterized histologically by
different patterns of intravascular or extravascular proliferation of endothelial cells and pericytes. Clinically, they are usually
manifested by erythematous–violaceous, livedoid, poorly demarcated plaques, which may evolve toward necrosis and ulceration. Constitutional
symptoms such as fever, malaise, and weight loss may be present. The pathogenesis of CRA has not been fully elucidated, but it is considered
to represent a vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF)-mediated reactive endothelial cell hyperplasia because of an underlying vascular
occlusion. A wide range of local and systemic disorders such as systemic infections (mainly bacterial endocarditis), valvular cardiac
disease, severe atherosclerosis, vascular insufficiency, cholesterol emboli, arteriovenous shunt, cryoglobulinemia, monoclonal gammopathy,
cold agglutinins, lymphoproliferative diseases, rheumatoid arthritis, hepatopathies, and adrenal diseases have been incriminated as
potential causative factors. The reactive vascular proliferation usually resolves after withdrawing the triggering hypoxic stimulus. DDA is
an unusual variant of CRA initially described in 1994 by Krell et al. It is characterized by a cutaneous diffuse proliferation of
endothelial cells within the full thickness of the dermis, interstitially arranged between the collagen bundles with minimal intravascular
involvement, usually associated with severe peripheral vascular atherosclerosis disease. Clinically DDA is manifested by multiple,
persistent skin ulcers, developing on retiform erythematous–violaceous plaques, often arising in nonacral areas (trunk, abdomen, proximal
aspects of the extremities). The lesions may be asymptomatic or painful and they tend to be persistent or enlarge progressively. The
diagnosis of DDA should be suspected in patients with cardiovascular risk factors (smoking history seems to be a strong risk factor) who
present persistent ulcerations in nonacral areas. The characteristic histopathological features along the vascular surgical evaluation and
imaging complementary explorations may permit to establish the definitive diagnosis. The differential diagnosis should be established with
the wide range of disorders manifested by retiform purpura secondary to microvascular occlusion, or by persistent deep necrotic ulcers such
as bacterial and fungal infections, pyoderma gangrenosum, systemic vasculitis, or even lymphoproliferative disorders or calciphylaxis.
Treatment should be based on the management of the underlying disease. In cases of peripheral vascular atherosclerotic disease, control of
cardiovascular risk factors and revascularization are considered the treatment of choice. Systemic steroids and isotretinoin have been used
in some cases with variable efficacy. Anticoagulation may be beneficial in cases associated with hypercoagulability. An increased awareness
of physicians regarding DDA as a potential causative disease of persistent multiple ulcerations seems to be important in order to avoid a
diagnostic delay. The suspicion of an underlying atherosclerotic disease should lead to a rapid evaluation of potential therapeutic options
including revascularization, which may lead to complete resolution of the skin lesions. Abbreviations: CRA = cutaneous reactive
angiomatoses, CT = computed tomography, DDA = diffuse dermal angiomatosis, DSA = digital subtraction angiography, VEGF = vascular
endothelial growth factor. Informed Consent: The patient provided her informed consent for the publication of this case report. The authors
have no conflict of interest to disclose.
