Authors’ Contribution: Study Design Data Collection Statistical Analysis Data Interpretation Manuscript Preparation Literature Search Funds
Collection Conflict of interest: None declared Patient: Male, 61 Final Diagnosis: AITL in Klinefelter syndrome Symptoms: — Medication: —
Clinical Procedure: Chemotherapy Specialty: Hematology Rare disease Although patients with Klinefelter syndrome have elevated risk and
incidence rates for several solid cancers, reports on the incidence of hematological malignancies have been equivocal. We report a patient
diagnosed with angioimmunoblastic T-cell lymphoma in whom Klinefelter syndrome was newly detected. Moreover, we discuss the development of a
variety of lymphomas in patients with Klinefelter syndrome. This is the first case describing angioimmunoblastic T-cell lymphoma in a
patient with Klinefelter syndrome who was treated with chemotherapy. Klinefelter syndrome is the most common sex-linked chromosomal
abnormality causing primary hypogonadism, occurring in approximately 1 in 1000 live male births; more than 3000 affected males are born
yearly . The most common karyotype is 47,XXY, but other variants (including mosaicism of more than 2 X chromosomes) are also observed . The
major clinical manifestations of Klinefelter syndrome include tall stature, gynecomastia, small testes, a small penis, and infertility. In
addition to these clinical characteristics and rare manifestations , Klinefelter syndrome patients have an increased risk of several
malignancies, especially male breast cancer and extragonadal germ cell tumors, primarily localized in the mediastinum . However,
hematological malignancies, such as leukemia and lymphoma, are not frequent in Klinefelter syndrome patients . Moreover, data on the
incidence of hematological malignancies is limited. In this case report, we describe a patient diagnosed with angioimmunoblastic T-cell
lymphoma in whom Klinefelter syndrome was newly detected through physical examination and cytogenetic analyses. To demonstrate the
relationship between Klinefelter syndrome and lymphoma, we review previous cases in which lymphoma developed in patients with Klinefelter
syndrome. A 61-year-old man initially presented with a palpable neck mass and weight loss in February 2013. He had no relevant family
history and had never been married. A physical examination revealed multiple enlarged lymph nodes in the neck, and in axillar and inguinal
areas. The patient was suspected to have a lymphoproliferative disease because multiple homogeneous lymph node enlargements were observed on
computed tomography (CT) (Figure 1A, 1B) and positron emission tomography (PET)-CT scans (Figure 1C). He underwent the excisional biopsy of
a right submandibular lymph node showing medium-to-large-sized atypical lymphoid cells infiltration with proliferative high endothelial
venules. Immunohistochemical staining showed tumor cells positive for CD3, CD4, PD-1, and negative for CD20. CD21 and clusterin stains
showed arborizing follicular dendritic cells. Therefore, these histologic findings and immunohistochemical staining result are compatible
with angioimmunoblastic T-cell lymphoma (Figure 2). Because the patient was tall and thin (height: 180.6 cm, body weight: 58.3 kg, and body
mass index: 17.87 kg/m2) and had a small penis and testes on physical examination, we suspected that he had gonadal dysfunction, similar to
that associated with Klinefelter syndrome. As expected, the patient was diagnosed with Klinefelter syndrome (47,XXY/46,XX mosaicism) based
on chromosomal analysis of his bone marrow (Figure 3). We regarded the body weight loss (14 kg loss during 3 months, 72 kg –> 58 kg) as B
symptom. With respect to IPI (Internal Prognostic Index) score, the patient was in the ‘high risk’ category of (IPI score 4 point; age >60
years, serum lactate dehydrogenase concentration above normal, Ann Arbor stage III or IV, number of extranodal disease sites >1). After
diagnosis, he received 6 cycles of CHOEP (cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, etoposide, vincristine, and prednisone); he showed an effective
response to chemotherapy and achieved a complete response (Figure 4). The complete remission state has been maintained for 2 years and he
has been receiving regular check-ups every 3 months at an outpatient clinic. There is a strong suspicion that patients with constitutional
chromosome abnormalities may be more susceptible to malignancies . Klinefelter syndrome patients also have an elevated risk of several
cancers, such as male breast cancer and extragonadal germ cell tumors, that are primarily localized in the mediastinum . Altered endogenous
hormones, such as elevated estrogen-to-testosterone ratio and elevated gonadotropin level, have been the primary focus for explaining the
observed increase in male breast cancer and extragonadal germ cell tumors among Klinefelter syndrome patients , but hematological
malignancies are not frequent in Klinefelter syndrome. The current case study joins a handful of previously documented cases of
lymphoproliferative disease in patients with Klinefelter syndrome (Table 1), indicating that Klinefelter syndrome may, in fact, be
associated with an increased incidence of and mortality from lymphoproliferative disease . Swerdlow et al. suggested that this relationship
is due to the over-activation of an oncogene on the X chromosome that evokes escape of X inactivation, and that the risk of lymphoma was
especially high in males who have multiple X chromosomes . There are no available data on whether immunologic problems develop more
frequently in patients with Klinefelter syndrome than in those with normal karyotype; however, several reports suggested that the prevalence
of autoimmune diseases, including systemic lupus erythematosus, may be elevated in males with Klinefelter syndrome . Klinefelter syndrome is
a rare disorder. In addition, Klinefelter syndrome is severely underdiagnosed or diagnosed late in life. Roughly 25% of the expected number
of cases are diagnosed, and the mean age at diagnosis is in the mid-30s. The reason for the underdiagnoses and late diagnoses is unknown,
but the relatively mild phenotype is a tempting explanation . Our patient also had mild phenotype (47,XXY/46,XX) and late diagnosis compared
to the mean age. Because of its rarity and low diagnosis rate, there are few published studies or case reports about its association with
lymphoma. Including our patient, we identified a total of 10 reported cases with malignant lymphoma in association with Klinefelter
syndrome. Although the consensus is that associations between Klinefelter syndrome and hematological conditions are purely coincidental, the
uncertainty can only be resolved through the collection of more data. There is strong evidence that patients with constitutional chromosome
abnormalities may be more susceptible to malignancy. Klinefelter syndrome patients have elevated risk of several cancers, but hematological
malignancy has not been documented in Klinefelter syndrome patients until now. The development of angioimmunoblastic T-cell lymphoma in
patients with Klinefelter syndrome is rare. Although evidence suggests that associations between Klinefelter syndrome and hematological
conditions are purely coincidental, the uncertainty can only be resolved by more data. (A, B) An initial contrast-enhanced computed
tomography (CT) scan revealed multiple homogeneous lymph node enlargements in the retrotracheal, paratracheal, and aortopulmonary window,
and the retrocaval, aortocaval, and paraaortic lymph nodes (arrow) without solid-organ involvement, which are suggestive of lymphoma. (C)
Initial 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography/CT showed multiple hypermetabolic lymph nodes in the bilateral cervical,
axillary, mediastinal, hilar, interlobar, retroperitoneal, iliac, and inguinal areas, which were suggestive of lymphoma. Additionally, the
oral cavity and major salivary glands had diffusely increased metabolism. (A) Histopathologic findings revealed intermediate-sized
neoplastic T-cells with clear cytoplasm and proliferation of high endothelial venules (hematoxylin and eosin ×100). (B) Immunohistochemical
staining for CD21 revealed arborizing follicular dendritic cells in a low-power view (CD21 immunostain ×40). (C) Tumor cells are positive
for CD3 (×200). (D) Tumor cells are positive for CD4 (×200). Cytogenetic analysis of a bone marrow specimen showed 46,XX(A)/47,XXY(B)
mosaicism (arrow indicates the additional X chromosome), which indicates a diagnosis of Klinefelter syndrome. (A, B) After 6 cycles of CHOEP
chemotherapy, the multiple enlarged lymph nodes disappeared or decreased on a post-chemotherapy contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT)
scan. (C) Multiple lymphoma lesions disappeared or decreased on post-chemotherapy 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography (FDG-
PET)/CT. However, focal mildly hypermetabolic lymph nodes remained in the bilateral mediastinal, hilar, and interlobar areas and were
assessed as reactive nodes rather than residual lymphoma lesions. The 18F-FDG uptakes of the oral cavity and major salivary glands were
normal when compared with the initial 18F-FDG PET/CT. Case reports of lymphoma associated with Klinefelter syndrome.
