Only one case of syndrome of inappropriate secretion of antidiuretic hormone with lateral medullary syndrome has been reported so far. We
report a case of lateral medullary syndrome showing syndrome of inappropriate secretion of antidiuretic hormone and analyze the
pathomechanism underlying its clinical features. A 67-year-old man was admitted to our hospital for dizziness, dysarthria, and dysphagia. He
was diagnosed with lateral medullary syndrome based on the neurological examination and brain magnetic resonance imaging. Horner syndrome
was absent. Asymptomatic hyponatremia appeared 9 days after admission and the patient was diagnosed with syndrome of inappropriate secretion
of antidiuretic hormone. Fluid restriction and intravenous furosemide injection improved the hyponatremia. Lateral medullary syndrome could
be associated with syndrome of inappropriate secretion of antidiuretic hormone. Hyponatremia, defined as condition in which serum sodium is
<135 mEq/L, is the most common electrolyte abnormality encountered worldwide . One of the major causes of hyponatremia is syndrome of
inappropriate secretion of antidiuretic hormone (SIADH), which is caused by various conditions such as malignancies, pulmonary disorders,
medications, and acute central nervous system diseases . A previous study reported hyponatremia in nearly 13.8 % of more than 8,500 cases of
stroke patients . However, only one case of SIADH with lateral medullary syndrome has been reported so far . In this report, we present
SIADH in a patient with lateral medullary syndrome and discuss the pathomechanism of SIADH. A 67-year-old man with untreated diabetes
mellitus developed dizziness, followed by dysarthria and dysphagia, 4 days before admission to our hospital. On admission, he was fully
conscious, and the physical examination was almost normal except for hypertension and tachycardia in a regular rhythm. Neurological
examination revealed equal and round pupils with a normal light reflex. His extraocular movements were full range without diplopia, but he
showed gaze-evoked horizontal nystagmus, dysarthria, and dysphagia. He had no complaint of dysgeusia. Muscle tonus was normal without
obvious paralysis in all four limbs. Examination of the sensory system revealed hypothermia and hypoalgesia with normal tactile sensation
over the left side of his face and right half of his trunk and limbs. Vibration and position sensation were normal in all four limbs. He
presented with ataxia in his left upper and lower limbs. Tendon reflexes were normal in his upper limbs and absent in his lower limbs
without the extensor plantar reflex. Brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) demonstrated hyperintensity in the left side of the dorsolateral
medulla with diffusion weighted imaging (DWI) with hypointensity on apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC)-map (Fig. 1). He was diagnosed as
having lateral medullary syndrome and was treated with oral clopidogrel (continued during admission), intravenous argatroban for 3 days,
edaravone for 9 days, and hydration with normal saline (1.5 L/day).Fig. 1Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and MR angiography findings. a, b
Diffusion-weighted magnetic resonance imaging (DWI) showed the hyperintensity in the left dorsolateral medulla (a, white arrow) with
hypointensity on apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC)-map (b, black arrow). c MR angiography demonstrated no obvious occlusion Magnetic
resonance imaging (MRI) and MR angiography findings. a, b Diffusion-weighted magnetic resonance imaging (DWI) showed the hyperintensity in
the left dorsolateral medulla (a, white arrow) with hypointensity on apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC)-map (b, black arrow). c MR
angiography demonstrated no obvious occlusion Hematological examination showed normal serum sodium levels of 139 mEq/L on admission,
however, the serum sodium levels decreased gradually, and 9 days after admission (13 days after onset), he developed asymptomatic
hyponatremia (109 mEq/L) with a decreased serum osmolarity of 223 mOsm/L (normal range, 275 – 295 mOsm/L). The turgor in all four limbs was
normal, and he did not present with obvious thirst. Thyroid, renal, and adrenal functions were normal, but increased serum levels of
antidiuretic hormone (ADH) (6.9 pg/mL; normal range, 0.3 – 4.2 pg/mL) were observed. Urine osmolarity was 668 mOsm/kgH2O (normal range, 100
– 1,300 mOsm/kgH2O), and urine sodium was 121 mOsm/L (normal range, 40 – 90 mOsm/L). Thoracoabdominal CT images showed no abnormalities,
such as mass lesions or lymphadenopathy. He was diagnosed as having SIADH based on the diagnostic criteria of Bartter and Schwartz . He was
treated with fluid restriction and intravenous furosemide injections. Laboratory examination on the 23rd day after admission showed almost
normal serum sodium levels (136 mEq/L) with normal serum ADH levels (1.2 pg/mL). His neurological symptoms, such as dizziness and
dysarthria, also gradually resolved, and thereafter, hyponatremia was not observed. Our patient with lateral medullary syndrome showed
asymptomatic hyponatremia 13 days after the onset of lateral medullary syndrome. With the exclusion of other causes of hyponatremia, we
diagnosed the hyponatremia as SIADH. It has been reported that SIADH is difficult to distinguish from cerebral salt wasting syndrome,
another cause of hyponatremia characterized by renal loss of sodium and decreases in extracellular fluid volume during intracranial
disorders ; nonetheless, the abnormal ADH secretion and lack of clinical symptoms of dehydration in our patient were consistent with the
characteristics of SIADH , although precise evaluation of the volemic state has been considered difficult . Thoracoabdominal CT images
indicated no evidence of ectopic ADH producing tumors. Nine days after admission, the serum sodium levels gradually improved. After the
primary treatment for SIADH, our patient presented almost normal serum sodium levels with resolution of his neurological symptoms, and
thereafter, he showed no relapse of hyponatremia, indicating that SIADH could be closely related to ischemic damage in the dorsolateral
medulla. As edaravone was administered for 9 days after admission, the possibility that edaravone contributed to the pathophysiology of
SIADH cannot be ruled out, although no case of SIADH associated with edaravone has been reported so far. In retrograde tracing studies, two
major neural pathways were identified between the dorsolateral medullary area and the hypothalamus [9, 10]. These include (1) the
sympathetic descending tract and (2) the interacting neural pathway between the paraventricular nucleus in the hypothalamus (PVH) and the
nucleus of the solitary tract (NTS), although the neurological function of the later pathway is not understood yet. The NTS could be
involved in the mechanism of SIADH in lateral medullary syndrome, as discussed in the previously reported case . However, as the NTS is
occasionally involved in lateral medullary syndrome , the ischemic damage of the NTS cannot simply explain the pathogenesis of SIADH in
lateral medullary syndrome. Although SIADH in our patient would be related to the exaggerated ADH response to ischemic damage as discussed
in the previously reported , we speculated that the ischemic damage of the ascending neural pathway from the NTS to the PVH could be related
to the pathogenesis of SIADH in lateral medullary syndrome. We analyzed the clinical findings on lateral medullary syndrome and SIADH, from
our patient and the previously reported one , and compared them with the typical features of lateral medullary syndrome [13, 14] (Table 1).
The three clinical symptoms, including (1) crossed sensory disturbance, (2) bulbar palsy, and (3) cerebellar ataxia, are considered the main
symptoms of lateral medullary syndrome [13, 14], and both patients showed these typical symptoms. Interestingly, asymptomatic hyponatremia
was identified at 13 days in our patient and at 15 days in the previously reported patient after the onset of lateral medullary syndrome.
The main difference in the clinical features between our patient and the previously reported one was the presence of Horner syndrome. The
absence of Horner syndrome in our patient indicated that the sympathetic descending tract was spared from severe ischemic damages, and the
sympathetic descending tract would be anatomically separated from the ascending neural pathway from the NTS to PVH. Both patients presented
no sign of dysgeusia, suggesting that the NTS was spared from severe ischemic damages, although the MRI findings in both patients were
similar to those of typical lateral medullary syndrome . The ascending neural pathway from the NTS to PVH may be associated with ADH
secretion, and this pathway may be less involved in most patients with lateral medullary syndrome, however, the ascending neural pathway
could be more involved in the clinical manifestations observed in our patient and the previously reported one . It is suggested that the
minority of patients with lateral medullary syndrome would present with damage of the ascending neural pathway from the NTS to PVH.Table
1Clinical features of SIADH in patients with Wallenberg syndrome [4, 11, 12]This casePrevious case Typical features [11,
12]Age(y.o.)/Sex67/Male44/Malemean age: 57 ± 11.9Male: Female = 2.25:1Initial symptomsdizziness, dysarthria, dysphagiaheadache, dysphagia,
hiccups,dizziness, vertigo, gait ataxia, dysarthria, dysphagiaNeurological symptomscrossed sensory disturbance, cerebellar ataxia,
nystagmuscrossed sensory disturbance, cerebellar ataxiacrossed sensory disturbance, cerebellar ataxiaHorner syndrome-++Dysgeusia--
occasionally observedPast historydiabetes mellitusnot describedhypertension, diabetes mellitus, cigarette smokingTreatment for cerebral
infarctionedaravone oral clopidogrel argatrobanedaravonevaries depend on the causesInterval days between the onset of Wallenberg syndrome
and hyponatremiathirteen daysfifteen daysSymptom of hyponatremiaasymptomaticasymptomaticTreatment for hyponetremiarestriction of fluid
intake, intravenous furosemiderestriction of fluid intakeClinical courseimprovedimproved Clinical features of SIADH in patients with
Wallenberg syndrome [4, 11, 12] We described SIADH in a patient with lateral medullary syndrome. Taken together with the previously reported
case, we suggest that lateral medullary syndrome could be associated with hyponatremia. ADC, apparent diffusion coefficient; ADH,
antidiuretic hormone; DWI, diffusion weighted imaging; NTS, the nucleus of the solitary tract; PVH, the paraventricular nucleus in the
hypothalamus; SIADH, syndrome of inappropriate secretion of antidiuretic hormone None. We receive no funding support. The datasets
supporting the conclusions of this article are included within the article. Study concept and design: HN, DY. Analysis and interpretation of
data: HN, DY, MY. Drafting of the manuscript: HN, DY. Critical revision of the manuscript for important intellectual content: HN, DY, MY.
All authors have read and approved the final manuscript. The authors declare that they have no competing interests. We obtained written
informed consent from the patient for publication of this case report, and any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is
available for review by the Editor of this journal. Not applicable.
