Gliomatosis peritonei (GP) is a rare condition characterized by mature glial tissue implants widespread in the peritoneum. The GP is often
associated with ovarian teratoma. However, little is known about the characteristics and prognosis of GP. The purpose of this study was to
describe the features, treatment, and prognosis of GP. Additionally, we review previously reported cases of GP, summarizing the presently
known data. From January 2000 to January 2016, cases of ovarian teratoma and GP treated at Peking Union Medical College Hospital were
reviewed. We assessed the pathology, treatments, and outcomes along with prognostic information. Additionally, the literature regarding this
clinical condition was also reviewed. Eight patients met the inclusion criteria. Patients had a median age of 20 (range, 15–25) years. GP
was diagnosed as the primary tumor in 6 patients and at a secondary surgery in two patients. The primary ovarian tumor consisted of immature
teratoma (n = 7) and mature teratoma (n = 1). Grades of immature ovarian teratoma were 2, grade 1; 3, grade 2; and 2, grade 3. Tumors mean
had a size of 20.4 (range, 11–30) cm. The median follow-up time was 60.5 (range, 3–144) months. All cases had conservative surgery and seven
of them had macroscopic residual disease postoperatively. During the study period, the eight patients remained alive and asymptomatic. Three
patients in the study experienced spontaneous pregnancy. After reviewing the existing literature, a total of 14 patients with nodal
gliomatosis were present and 10 of them were alive. According to the literature review, five articles reported more than five cases. Of a
total of 67 patients, 60 of them remained alive. The prognosis of immature ovarian teratoma with GP is favorable. Complete resection of GP
is often difficult. Residual peritoneal disease in GP can be asymptomatic and quiescent over a long period. A more conservative surgical
approach may be carried out in patients with massive peritoneal spread after the presence of metastatic immature elements is excluded. Owing
to the risk of recurrence and malignant transformation of GP, a long-term follow-up is necessary for patients with residual peritoneal
disease. Gliomatosis peritonei (GP) is a rare disease characterized by many peritoneal and omental implants composed of mature glial tissue.
It is mainly associated with ovarian teratomas, especially in immature ovarian teratoma. Thus far, only about 100 cases have been reported .
According to the WHO grading system for immature ovarian teratoma, GP is considered as grade 0. In fact, GP has long been associated with
good prognosis. Because of its rarity, the prognostic effect of GP and its clinical characteristics remain to be clarified. In the present
study, we report eight cases of GP diagnosed and treated at our hospital. We also reviewed the relevant literature to increase the
understanding of this disease. From January 2000 to January 2016, cases of ovarian teratoma with GP diagnosed at Peking Union Medical
College Hospital were reviewed. Medical and pathological records were retrospectively reviewed to evaluate the clinical features of all
patients. Patients were included in the study if they met the following criteria: histological review of the first tumor by an expert
pathologist; diagnosis of ovarian teratoma (mature or immature), excluding other malignant germ cell tumors; For patients who received
adjuvant chemotherapy after surgery, immature teratoma (IMT) associated with GP at the secondary surgery were excluded; patients whose
follow-up information was intact. The relevant literature was reviewed simultaneously. Ovarian teratomas were graded according to the
published guidelines. Peritoneal nodal specimens were carefully examined to exclude the co-existence of metastatic immature elements. The
precise surgical details were recorded. Oncologic and pregnancy outcome were analyzed. All patients had undergone conservative surgery
(conservation of uterus and at least a portion of an ovary). Additional surgical procedures, such as peritonectomies, appendectomy,
omentectomy, and lymphadenectomy were performed depending on the stage and macroscopic situation during the operation. Some patients
underwent a second surgery. Adjuvant chemotherapy was given because of tumor rupture, stage IC, or advanced stage or high grade of teratoma
(grade 2 or grade 3) according to the NCCN guideline. Follow-up was based on clinical examination and radiologic imaging. Patient
information was updated until April 2016 with a median follow-up of 60.5 (range: 3–144) months. During the study period, eight patients that
presented at our hospital met the inclusion criteria (shown in Fig. 1). The patients’ clinical and pathological features are presented in
Table 1. Patients had a median age of 20 (range: 15–25) years. The mean size of tumors was 20.4 (range: 11–30) cm. In the present study,
seven primary ovarian tumors were immature teratomas (n = 7; grade 1, 2; grade 2, 3; and grade 3, 2) (Fig. 2 a, b), and one was a mature
teratoma (n = 1) (Fig. 2c, d). The level of blood CA125 before therapy was available in seven patients, with a median CA125 level of 340.3
U/ml (range: 98.9–673.5 U/ml).Fig. 1Summarized figure of ovarian teratoma with GPTable 1Clinical and pathological features of 8 cases with
GPcaseAge, yCA125 U/mlTumor Size (cm)Surgical Procedure (1st surgery)Primary tumorMetastatic Tissue of the 1st surgeryAdjuvant
therapyGFAPResidual GPOutcome123420.118USO, Peritonectomies, Appendectomy, omenctomyIMT, G1GPPEB*3NAYESAlive 16 months22598.922USO,
Peritonectomies, Omenctomy, lymphadenectomyMTGP, Nodal, gliomatosisNO+YESAlive 3 months316340.420USO, Peritonectomies, Omenctomy,
lymphadenectomyIMT, G2GP, Nodal, gliomatosisPEB*6+YESAlive 68 months418171.714cystectomyIMT, G2NAPEB*3NAYESAlive
38 months523NA11cystectomyIMT, G2NANONAYESAlive 61 months622381.125USO, Peritonectomies, Omenctomy, lymphadenectomyIMT, G1GP, Nodal,
gliomatosisNO+YESAlive 60 months715673.523USO, Peritonectomies, Omenctomy, lymphadenectomyLOV: IMT, G3, ROV: G1GPPEB*2 PVB*2 PV*2NANOAlive
97 months817238.730USO, Peritonectomies, Omenctomy, Lymphadenectomy, AppendectomyIMT, G3GP, Nodal, gliomatosisPEB*4NAYESAlive 144 months
GFAP glial fibrillary acidic protein, GP gliomatosis peritonei, IMT immature teratoma, MT mature teratoma, NA not available, USO unilateral
salpingo-oophorectomy, PEB bleomycin, etoposide, cisplatin, PVB bleomycin, vincristine,cisplatin, PV vincristine,cisplatinFig. 2Immature
neuroepithelial tissue in the form of neuroectodermal rosettes are admixed with mature tissues a HE stain × 40. Immature neuroectodermal
tissue b HE stain × 200. Ovarian mature teratoma is composed of various tissue components like skin and skin appendages c, cartilage d HE
stain × 40. Peritoneal gliomatosis showing a discrete nodule of mature glial tissue, which surrounded by fibroadipose tissue of peritoneum e
HE stain × 40. Mature glial tissue is seen in right iliac lymph node f HE stain × 40 Summarized figure of ovarian teratoma with GP Clinical
and pathological features of 8 cases with GP GFAP glial fibrillary acidic protein, GP gliomatosis peritonei, IMT immature teratoma, MT
mature teratoma, NA not available, USO unilateral salpingo-oophorectomy, PEB bleomycin, etoposide, cisplatin, PVB bleomycin,
vincristine,cisplatin, PV vincristine,cisplatin Immature neuroepithelial tissue in the form of neuroectodermal rosettes are admixed with
mature tissues a HE stain × 40. Immature neuroectodermal tissue b HE stain × 200. Ovarian mature teratoma is composed of various tissue
components like skin and skin appendages c, cartilage d HE stain × 40. Peritoneal gliomatosis showing a discrete nodule of mature glial
tissue, which surrounded by fibroadipose tissue of peritoneum e HE stain × 40. Mature glial tissue is seen in right iliac lymph node f HE
stain × 40 Six patients had undergone comprehensive staging surgery, which led to the diagnosis of GP (Fig. 2e). The other two patients
underwent unilateral cystectomy as the first surgery and GP was detected in the secondary surgery (cases 4 and 5). Seven patients had
residual disease postoperatively. In case 4, the patient presented with abdominal distension, abdominal pain, nausea, and vomiting. The B
ultrasound showed a 14-cm cystic-solid pelvic mass. She underwent a unilateral cystectomy and was diagnosed with immature ovarian teratoma
(grade 2). Subsequently, she received three cycles of bleomycin, etoposide, and cisplatin (PEB). Four months after the completion of
chemotherapy, the computed tomography (CT) showed masses in Douglas’ pouch and on the liver surface with enlarged pelvic lymph nodes. All
tumor markers were negative before the second surgery. Second surgery showed numerous miliary nodules on the surface of the intestine and
masses of about 3 to 5 cm in Douglas’ pouch. The implants were so dispersed that complete resection of the tumors was impossible. Frozen
section of the mass in Douglas pouch showed mature glial elements without immature tissues. Thus, growing teratoma syndrome (GTS) was
diagnosed. After the diagnosis of GP, she did not receive further therapy. She was remained alive with persisting but asymptomatic disease
32 months after the diagnosis of GP (36 months after the diagnosis of immature ovarian teratoma). In case 5, the patient underwent
laparoscopic cystectomy because of ovarian cyst at another hospital. The pathologic evaluation indicated the presence of immature teratoma
(grade 2). However, she was not given chemotherapy at that time. Six months after the first surgery, she suffered from recurrence of the
ovarian cyst. A second laparoscopic surgery was performed, revealing both ovarian cysts, as well as peritoneal and pelvic wall implants.
Laparoscopic cystectomy was performed. Surgical pathology showed mature teratoma, associated with GP. Ten months later, a CT showed multiple
masses in the abdominopelvic cavity, near the liver and spleen. The surgical procedure consisted of a suboptimal cytoreduction. After the
second surgery, the pathologic evaluation of resected tissue showed mature teratoma and mature peritoneal gliomatosis. She remained alive
and asymptomatic 53 months after the diagnosis of GP (61 months after the diagnosis of mature ovarian teratoma). Four cases (case 2, 3, 6,
and 8) of nodal gliomatosis were detected in form of glial tissue in the pelvic lymph nodes (Fig. 2f). A summary of the cases of nodal
gliomatosis is presented in Table 2. A total of 14 patients with nodal gliomatosis were described and 10 remained alive at the time of the
last follow-up. Most of the published papers on GP were case reports. Only 5 articles in the literature reported more than five cases
(Table 3). For a total of 67 patients, 60 of them were still alive at the time of the last follow-up.Table 2Summary of nodal gliomatosis
cases reported in the literaturesAuthorsAgeLN sitesPrimary tumorTreatmentOutcomeBenirschke , 196018 ysRetroperitoneal,ilac,cervical
axillaryMature teratomachemoradiotherapyDead 8 monthsNagashima , 197422ysInguinal, mesenteric, mediastinal, cervicalIMTS+ ChDead
8 monthsShafie 198412 ysOmentalMTS+ ChNR 5 ysPerrone 198610 moPara-aroticIMT G1SurgeryNR 9 monthsKhan 200523 ysLymph nodeIMT G1S+ ChNAFang
201520 ysPara-aroticIMT G3S+ ChAlive 36 monthsKim 201334 ysHypogastricIMT G1SNR 9 monthsLi Liang 201518 ysLymph nodeIMT G1NAANED 19 months42
ysLymph nodeMGCTNAAWD 23 months10 ysLymph nodeMGCTNAANED 11 monthsPresent study25 ysiliacMTSurgeryAlive 3 months16 ysIliacIMT G2S+ ChAlive
68 months22 ysiliacIMT G1S+ ChAlive 60 months17 ysiliacIMT G3S+ ChAlive 144 months ANED alive with no evidence of disease, AWD alive with
disease, Ch chemotherapy, IMT immature teratoma, LN lymph node, MT mature teratoma, MGCT mixed germ cell tumor, NA not available, NR not
recurrence, S surgery, ys yearsTable 3Cases of ovarian teratoma associated with GP in studies that reported more than five
casesAuthorsCasesMedian Age ysOvarian neoplasmDiagnosisRecurrenceTreatmentFollow upNorris , (1976)717IMT: G1: 5, G2-G3: 21st surgery: 7NAS:
4, S + Ch: 1, S + Rx:25 alive, 1 dead, 1 NAHarms , (1989)1311.5IMT: G1:8, G2-G3: 51st surgery: 11, 2nd surgery: 2NOS: 6, S + Ch: 713
aliveYoon , (2012)1613IMT: G1: 4, G2-G3: 11, MT:11st surgery: 15, 2nd surgery: 137.5 %, (6/16)S: 3, S + Ch: 1315 alive, 1 deadBentivegna, ,
(2015)a 936IMT: G1: 5, G2-G3: 41st surgery: 1, 2nd surgery: 822.2 %, (2/9)S: 5, S + Ch: 49 aliveLiang , (2015)14NAIMT: G1: 5, G2-G3: 91st
surgery: 10, 2nd surgery: 4NANA10 alive, NA: 4Present820IMT: G1: 2, G2-G3: 5, MT: 11st surgery: 6, 2nd surgery: 2NOS: 3, S + Ch: 58
aliveTotal67NAIMT: G1: 29, G2-G3: 35, MT: 21st surgery: 50, 2nd surgery: 1717.4 %, (8/46)b S: 21, S + Ch: 30, S + Rx:2, NA:1460 alive, 2
dead, NA: 5 Ch chemotherapy, IMT immature teratoma, MT mature teratoma, NA not available, S surgery, Rx radiotherapy aOne case in the
article (case 8) was consisted of mixed ovarian germ tumor (yolk sac and dysgerminoma and mature teratoma). Thus, the table shows 9 cases
bAs there was no data available in the reference 8 and 10, we just add up the data from the remaining articles Summary of nodal gliomatosis
cases reported in the literatures ANED alive with no evidence of disease, AWD alive with disease, Ch chemotherapy, IMT immature teratoma, LN
lymph node, MT mature teratoma, MGCT mixed germ cell tumor, NA not available, NR not recurrence, S surgery, ys years Cases of ovarian
teratoma associated with GP in studies that reported more than five cases Ch chemotherapy, IMT immature teratoma, MT mature teratoma, NA not
available, S surgery, Rx radiotherapy aOne case in the article (case 8) was consisted of mixed ovarian germ tumor (yolk sac and dysgerminoma
and mature teratoma). Thus, the table shows 9 cases bAs there was no data available in the reference 8 and 10, we just add up the data from
the remaining articles Five patients were given chemotherapy (PEB or bleomycin, vincristine, and cisplatin ). If the dose of bleomycin
reached the lifetime dose, the chemotherapy regimen was changed to PE or PV by omitting bleomycin. Immunohistochemical staining for glial
fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP) was available in three cases. All three cases were positive for GFAP (Fig. 3a). Two of them were positive
for S-100 protein (Fig. 3b). Three patients (cases 5, 6, and 8) in our group experienced a spontaneous pregnancy.Fig. 3Positive
immunohistochemical staining of the mature glial tissue with glial glial fibrillary acidic protein immunostain (a) and S 100 (b) × 100
Positive immunohistochemical staining of the mature glial tissue with glial glial fibrillary acidic protein immunostain (a) and S 100
(b) × 100 The metastatic implantation of mature glial tissue on the surface of the peritoneum, omentum, and abdominal lymph nodes is defined
as GP. In a clinical setting, these widespread peritoneal, grayish tan-colored, tiny nodules encountered intraoperatively may be
misdiagnosed as ovarian carcinomas or peritoneal tuberculosis. Ideal optimal resection may not be achieved in such cases with widespread
implantation. However, GP has a favorable prognosis. In the report by Yoon et al., the overall survival did not differ between immature
ovarian teratomas with GP and immature ovarian teratomas without GP, though patients with GP presented more frequent recurrence and shorter
recurrence-free survival . All patients (15 cases with GP) except one are currently alive when the articles were published. GP is often
diagnosed on HE-stained tissue sections, and its differentiation with low-grade epithelial ovarian tumors was difficult. A positive staining
reaction of glial tissue for the neural marker, GFAP, is helpful. GFAP immunostain confirmed the glial nature of the tissue. A strong
expression often suggests tumor cells are mature and well differentiated . The etiology of GP is largely unknown. According to previous
reports, there are two theories about the development of GP. One relates to capsular defects of the primary teratoma or dissemination via
angiolymphatic channels. In some cases, GP within the omentum immediately adjacent to a capsular defect supports the mechanism of spread in
its inception . In 11 of the 12 cases in Robboy’s report, the capsule either had a tear or was adherent to the omentum or adnexal structure
. In support of lymphatic dissemination, mature glial tissue has been presented in para-aortic and pelvic lymph nodes with or without the
presence of GP (Table 2). In some reports, GP was only found in the second surgery (as in case 4 in the present study). Kim et al. reviewed
about 100 cases in the literature and found 9 cases of nodal gliomatosis in the pelvic or para-aortic lymph nodes with or without the
presence of GP . However, in their literature review, there were three cases of nodal gliomatosis presented as grades 1 to 3. As the nodal
implantation contained immature elements, these should not be considered as nodal gliomatosis but as metastasis of the immature teratoma.
The other theory suggests that glial foci are genetically unassociated with teratoma. In Ferguson’s study , they use polymorphic
microsatellite (MS) loci in two cases to address the origin of GP. They found that glial implants and normal tissue showed heterozygosity,
while the teratoma showed homozygosity at the same MS loci. Their findings indicated that glial implants in GP were unrelated to the ovarian
teratoma and arise from normal cells such as pluripotent Müllerian stem cells. It is possible that peritoneal stem cells can differentiate
into glial cells under the stimulation of some factors secreted by teratomas . The occurrence of GP after ventriculoperitoneal shunt
operations when glial tissue is transported from cerebrospinal fluid into peritoneal cavity via shunt further support this theory . However,
the detailed mechanisms by which subperitoneal cells develop into glial follicles remain to be determined. The stage and grade of the
primary teratoma and the grade of its metastatic tumor are related to the prognosis of teratoma. Robboy and Scully reviewed the literature
and presented a large series of cases . They found that the prognoses in metastasized ovarian teratomas, or in ovarian teratomas leading to
peritoneal implants, are favorable when the implants are composed of fully mature glial tissue. Müller reviewed all cases of GP published
between 1906 and 2002. Eleven cases showed adverse outcomes . They found that the recurrence of disease was associated with lack of
extensive histological sampling at the first surgery. Thus, all specimens need to be adequately sampled and multiple biopsies should be
taken to exclude immature glial tissue or teratoma elements. Once the presence of immature teratoma is confirmed in the metastatic tissue,
the treatment scheme and prognosis may change. Most of the papers on GP are cases. At present there are only 5 articles which report more
than five cases (Table 3) [2, 8, 10–12]. Most cases of GP are associated with ovarian teratoma, especially with immature ovarian teratoma.
In Yoon’s report, there were a total of 16 ovarian teratomas associated with GP . Among them, 15 cases were of immature ovarian teratomas of
various grades (4 cases were grade 1; 11 cases were grade 2 or 3). Liang reported the largest series of GP cases so far . Sixteen of 23
cases were associated with immature ovarian teratomas. However, immature ovarian teratoma with GP showed better prognosis than would be
expected based on the grading of the primary immature teratoma. In Norris’s report, the survival of patients with grades 1, 2, and 3 were
82 %, 63 %, and 30 %, respectively . In Yoon’s report, all but one case of immature teratoma with GP remained alive when their report was
published, although GP showed more frequent recurrences . In Robboy’s report, 12 patients were alive and well . More over, the survival of 8
patients in our series may also indicate that the presence of mature glial implants does not affect adversely the prognosis of ovarian
teratoma. Presence of glial tissue in lymph nodes is rare. Thus far, 14 cases have been reported in nine articles [6, 8, 13–18] (Table 2).
Based on previous reports, adjuvant chemotherapy is unnecessary for patients with retroperitoneal lymph node metastasis of mature glial
tissue. The prognosis of patients with nodal gliomatosis is favorable. In our series, patients with nodal gliomatosis remained alive and
well during the follow-up period. Sometimes immature ovarian teratoma can be associated with miliary spread of immature implants. After
surgery and chemotherapy, the immature tissue may transfer into mature tissue. Chemotherapeutic retroconversion has also been called growing
teratoma syndrome (GTS) . However, there are some differences between GP and GTS. First, GP is composed of pure mature implants in the
peritoneum without other mature nonglial tissues which can be seen in GTS. Second, GP could be encountered in the first surgery without
prior chemotherapy. At last, the management of these two terms is quite different. An optimal cytoreduction is recommended for GTS to avoid
complications such as bowel obstruction and perforation . Because the lesions in GP are extensive, complete resection of GP is usually
difficult. Luckily residual peritoneal disease in GP can be asymptomatic and quiescent over a long period . Thus, residual implants can be
ignored and the therapy is mainly depended on the stage and grade of the primary ovarian teratoma. Seven cases in our series presented
macroscopic residual disease at postoperatively, and all of these patients remained alive and asymptomatic during the median follow-up of
60.5 months. Bentivegna reported 10 cases of GP, while six of them were managed by conservative surgery . All of their patients were
asymptomatic at the time of the last consultation, and half had incomplete resected macroscopic GP. These authors found residual peritoneal
disease could be totally quiescent over a long period without any impact on patient outcomes. As ovarian teratoma mostly occurs in young
women who wish to preserve fertility, it is important to reduce the surgical scope and reduce surgical trauma without compromising cure
rate. As residual implants of GP can be ignored, a more conservative surgical approach may be carried out in patients with massive
peritoneal spread after exclusion of the presence of metastatic immature elements. In the review of literature undertaken by Müller (86
cases plus their own two cases) , three progressions were observed: GP was asymptomatic and detected by a secondary surgery; GP may undergo
“fibroblastic transformation” and gradually disappear ; GP may transform into malignant glial neoplasms such as glioblastoma which can
result in patient death . In most of the cases, patients with massive peritoneal spread cannot be completely resected, but these lesions can
be totally quiescent over a long period. GP is associated with frequent recurrence in patients with immature ovarian teratoma . In rare
cases, GP showed potential for malignant transformation after several years. Thus, a long period of careful monitoring for patients with GP
may be needed. Gliomatosis peritonei is metastatic implantation of mature glial tissue on surfaces of peritoneum. It is often associated
with ovarian teratoma of any grade. The prognosis of GP is favorable. Because GP is always present with massive peritoneal implantation,
optimal resection is difficult. Although residual peritoneal disease can be totally quiescent over a long period, long-term follow-up is
needed for patients with residual disease. A more conservative surgical approach may be carried out in patients with massive peritoneal
spread. GFAP: glial fibrillary acidic protein; GP: Gliomatosis peritonei; GTS: growing teratoma syndrome; IMT: immature ovarian teratoma;
MGCT: mixed germ cell tumor; PEB: bleomycin, etoposide, and cisplatin; PVB: bleomycin, vincristine, cisplatin; USO: unilateral salpingo-
oophorectomy. We show greatful thanks to Yang Chen for collection of the original articles about GP published many years ago. We thank Fan
Yu (M.D. Candidate, Peking Union Medical College) for drawing figures. No The dataset supporting the conclusions of this article is included
within the article and its additional files. DW have participated in the design of the study, analyzed the data, prepared the manuscript and
revised it critically. HS have designed the study, responsed for the concept, analyzed the data and revised it critically for important
intellectual content. CJ, RF have made paraffin sections and immunohistochemical examinations, the pathological pictures collection and
their interpretation. JS have participated for the acquisition and analysis of data. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. The
authors declare that they have no competing interests. Not applicable. Obstetrics and Gynecology Peking Union Medical College Hospital Human
Research Ethics Committee Approval was obtained for the use of all samples.
