Reactive perforating collagenosis (RPC) is a rare form of transepithelial elimination, in which altered collagen is extruded through the
epidermis. There are 2 types of RPC, acquired RPC (ARPC) and inherited RPC, while the latter is extremely rare. Here we report on 1 case of
ARPC. A 73-year-old female was presented with strongly itchy papules over her back and lower limbs for 3 months. She denied the history of
oozing or vesiculation. A cutaneous examination showed diffusely distributed multiple well-defined keratotic papules, 4 to 10 mm in
diameter, on the bilateral lower limbs and back as well as a few papules on her chest and forearm. Scratching scars were over the resolved
lesions while Koebner phenomenon was negative. The patient had a history of type 2 diabetes for 15 years. Laboratory examinations showed
elevated blood glucose level. Skin lesion biopsy showed a well-circumscribed area of necrosis filled with a keratotic plug. Parakeratotic
cells and lymphocytic infiltration could be seen in the necrosed area. In dermis, sparse fiber bundles were seen perforating the epidermis.
These degenerated fiber bundles were notarized as collagen fiber by elastic fiber stain, suggesting a diagnosis of RPC. Then a diagnosis of
ARPC was made according to the onset age and the history of diabetes mellitus. She was treated with topical application of corticosteroids
twice a day and oral antihistamine once a day along with compound glycyrrhizin tablets 3 times a day. And the blood glucose was controlled
in a satisfying range. Two months later, a significant improvement was seen in this patient. Since there is no efficient therapy to RPC,
moreover, ARPC is considered to be associated with some systemic diseases, the management of the coexisting disease is quite crucial. The
patient in this case received a substantial improvement due to the control of blood glucose and application of compound glycyrrhizin
tablets. There are 4 classical forms of transepithelial elimination (TEE) disorders: reactive perforating collagenosis (RPC), elastosis
perforans serpiginosa (EPS), perforating folliculitis (PF), and Kyrle disease (KD). These 4 diseases share common features of elimination of
altered dermal components through epidermis; also they have some specific differentiating features. RPC is a rare form of TEE, in which
altered collagen is genetically extruded through the epidermis. There are 2 types of RPC, acquired RPC (ARPC) and inherited RPC and it is
indicated that ARPC may be associated with several inflammatory or malignant systemic diseases. Here, we reported a case of ARPC accompanied
with diabetes mellitus. This patient signed informed consent for the publication of this case report and the associated images. And this
study was approved by the ethics committee of Shanghai Tenth People's Hospital, Tongji University School of Medicine. A 73-year-old female
was presented to our out-patient department with strongly itchy papules over her back and bilateral lower limbs for 3 months without
specific causes. The exacerbation of pruritus and lesions was presented through time. There was no history of oozing or vesiculation during
the whole course of disease. Cutaneous examination revealed diffusely distributed multiple well-defined keratotic papules on the bilateral
lower limbs and back, also a few papules on the chest and forearm. Those keratotic papules, 4 to 10 mm in diameter were adhered by keratotic
plugs in the center. Scars caused by scratching could be seen over the resolved lesions (Fig. 1) and Koebner phenomenon was negative. Oral
mucosa, vaginal mucosa, and cutaneous appendages were normal. Systemic examination was unremarkable. The patient had a history of type 2
diabetes for 15 years. Laboratory examinations showed elevated blood glucose level. Complete hemogram, hepatic function tests, and renal
function tests were within normal ranges. Lesions of the patient presented as multiple well-defined keratotic papules on the bilateral lower
limbs (A) and back (C) diffusely distributed, also few papules can be seen on the upper limbs (B). Biopsy showed a well-circumscribed area
of necrosis filled with a keratotic plug. In the necrosed area, parakeratotic cells and lymphocytic infiltration could be seen. Sparse fiber
bundles in dermis were seen to perforate epidermis. These degenerated fiber bundles were notarized as collagen fiber by elastic fiber stain,
suggesting a diagnosis of RPC (Fig. 2). According to the onset age and the accompany disease, diabetes mellitus, we tended to make a
diagnosis of ARPC. Biopsy examination shows a well-circumscribed area of necrosis, which is filled with a keratotic plug (A) (H&E ×20). In
the necrosed area, parakeratotic cells and lymphocytic infiltration can be seen (B) (H&E ×40). Sparse fiber bundles perforate from dermis to
epidermis. (C, D) (H&E ×100, H&E ×200). These degenerated fiber bundles were notarized as collagen fiber (color red by elastic fiber stain
(E) (elastic stain ×100). H&E = haematoxylin and eosin. The treatment with topical application of corticosteroids twice a day and oral
antihistamine once a day along with compound glycyrrhizin tablets (manufactured by Japanese Minophagen Pharmaceutical Co (Ltd, 3F Shinjuku
Mitsui Bldg #2, 3-2-11, Nishi-Shinjuku Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo 160-0023, JAPAN), containing 25 mg glycyrrhizin, 35 mg monoammonium
glycyrrhizinate, 25 mg aminoacetic acid, and 25 mg methionine per tablet) 3 times per day and 2 tablets per time resulted in fair
improvement over the period of 2 months. Moreover, an expert on endocrinology was invited for a consultation to control the blood glucose.
RPC is a rare skin disorder characterized by transepidermal elimination of altered collagen through the epidermis. The first case was
reported by Mehregan et al in 1967. There are 2 patterns of RPC: inherited RPC is relatively rare and usually seen in children, while
acquired RPC (ARPC) can usually be seen in adults, which is sometimes accompanied by systemic diseases. ARPC is also said to be triggered by
minor trauma, arthropod bites, scabies infection, and scratching. Although the pathogenesis of ARPC is unknown, overexpression of
transforming growth factor-3 (TGF-β3) has been seen in many ARPC patients. TGF-β, matrix metalloproteinase-1, and tissue inhibitor of
metalloproteinase-1 immunoreactivity were significantly increased in the lesions of ARPC, indicating the crucial function of these factors
in regulating epidermal homeostasis, postponing the re-epithelialization and remodeling, and changing extracellular matrix protein
metabolism. Moreover, some authors indicate that the genetic abnormality of the collagen causes the focal damage of RPC and leads to
collagen perforation after necrolysis of the overlying epidermis. While some researches support the theory that transepidermal elimination
of collagen is simply a reaction to chronic scratching or rubbing in pruritic diseases. There are 4 classical forms of TEE disorders: RPC,
EPS, PF, and KD. These 4 diseases share common features of elimination of altered dermal components through epidermis and the
differentiation is made according to the types of epidermal damage and the features of elimination material. The classic lesion and
histopathological examination are the major distinguishing characteristics. The classic lesions of RPC are isolated papules, with keratotic
plugs in the center, and are usually self-healing in 6 to 8 weeks without any therapy, but often recur. And the histopathological changes of
the lesion show hyperplasia, thickening of epidermis, and widening of papillary dermis, with degenerated collagen bundles in the early
period. In the later period, cup-shape invagination of epidermis can be seen, which is filled with keratotic plug, intermingled with
parakeratotic cells, degenerated collagen fibers and cell fragments. Necrotic basophilic collagen fibers are eliminated to epidermis. The
lesions of EPS patients are usually keratosis papules, with desquamation or atrophy in the center. Those asymptomatic or pruriginous plaques
grouped in arciform or serpiginous pattern. Lesions of PF patients are isolated papules, with white keratotic plugs in the center, curly can
be seen in the keratotic plug. The lesions of KD are papules filled with conical keratotic plugs, which are always found near follicle.
Histopathological examination is crucial for differential diagnosis. We reviewed some cases of ARPC reported in the literature and tried to
summarize the clinical characteristics, effective management, as well as prognosis. In general, the skin lesions of the majority were
described as multiple round plaques and nodules with central hyperkeratotic plugs, usually distributing on the extremities and back,
sometimes face and neck. Pruritus was common but Koebner phenomenon was not mentioned in most of the cases, not as previously reported. Of
these patients, the most common associated diseases were diabetes mellitus (DM, type 1, and type 2 were both reported) and complications of
DM, including chronic renal failure, cardiopathy, and retinopathy. Some autoimmune diseases were regarded to be associated as well, such as
systemic lupus erythematous, vasculitis, dermatomyositis, and Mikulicz disease (an IgG4-related disease). Moreover, some malignancies,
including lymphoma, thyroid carcinoma, and breast carcinoma, were also reported as coexisting diseases. Currently, there is no efficient
therapy to RPC. Treatment is mainly aimed at controlling the symptom. In the literature, multiple treatments, including topical
corticosteroids under occlusion, emollients, keratolytics retinoids, systemic antihistaminics, allopurinol, isotretinoinm, narrow-band
ultraviolet B phototherapy, and liquid nitrogen cryotherapy, have been tried, with different degrees of improvements. In the case of our
patient, compound glycyrrhizin tablet was one of the treatments. Glycyrrhizin, an active component of liquorice roots, had a glucocorticoid-
like effect and was used to manage some autoimmune diseases, such as systemic lupus erythematous, vasculitis, and alopecia areata. However,
it was the first time that CGT was reported to be used to treat ARPC to our knowledge. Moreover, since ARPC is considered to be associated
with some systemic diseases, the management of the coexisting disease is also beneficial. As for this patient, who got a significant
amelioration without recurrence, the control of blood glucose was quite crucial. In conclusion, we reported a rare case of ARPC with a good
prognosis. It indicated that recognition and control of associated disease and CGT therapy may help to treat ARPC. We thank all members from
the Department of Dermatology of Shanghai Tenth People's Hospital for their advice and encouragement. Abbreviations: ARPC = acquired
reactive perforating collagenosis, KD = Kyrle disease, MMP = matrix metalloproteinase, PF = perforating folliculitis, RPC = reactive
perforating collagenosis, TEE = transepithelial elimination, TGF = transforming growth factor. CF and YW contributed equally to this paper.
This work was supported in part by grants from National Science Foundation of China (81301356), National Science Foundation of Shanghai
(13ZR1432200), and the Science and Technology Commission of Shanghai Municipality Grant (134119b0700). The authors have no conflicts of
interest to disclose.
