Right ventricular failure is a serious complication after left ventricular assist device placement. A 70-year-old male in decompensated
heart failure with right ventricular failure after the placement of a left ventricular assist device. A single dual-lumen PROTEKDuo cannula
was inserted percutaneously via the internal jugular vein to draw blood from the right atrium and return into the pulmonary artery using the
CentriMag system, by passing the failing ventricle. The patient was successfully weaned from right ventricular assist device. In comparison
to two-cannula conventional procedures, this right ventrivular assist device system improves patient rehabilitation and minimizes blood loss
and risk of infection, while shortening procedure time and improving clinical outcomes in right ventricular failure. Perioperative right
ventricular failure (RVF) is associated with a poor prognosis and high mortality . After left ventricular assist device (LVAD) placement,
7–15 % of patients develop significant RVF that requires temporary right ventricular assist device (RVAD) placement [1, 2]. Temporary RVAD
placement has previously required additional operations contributing to less satisfactory results compared to isolated continuous flow LVADs
. Traditionally, extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO) and RVAD insertion are established through sternotomy with direct right atrial
and pulmonary artery (PA) cannulation or PA cannulation via graft. Other centers have proposed percutaneous RVAD placement through the right
internal jugular vein (IJV) as well as femoral vein cannulation . Impella RP (Abiomed, Inc, Danvers, MA, USA) is a temporary RVAD with
percutaneous approach, however the access site is the femoral vein limiting patient ambulation and body position . The dual-lumen PROTEKDuo
(CadiacAssist, Inc. Pittsburgh, PA, USA) contains omnidirectional inflow and outflow ports for simultaneous drainage and reinfusion of blood
. Through a minimally-invasive approach via the IJV, the dual-lumen PROTEKDuo is positioned to draw blood from the right atrium and propel
it into the PA, thereby bypassing the failing ventricle (Fig. 1).Fig. 1PROTEKDuo Cannula. The PROTEKDuo Cannula is a double lumen cannula.
The proximal holes drain blood from right atrium to the pump. The distal holes return blood to the pulmonary artery PROTEKDuo Cannula. The
PROTEKDuo Cannula is a double lumen cannula. The proximal holes drain blood from right atrium to the pump. The distal holes return blood to
the pulmonary artery This case describes successful restoration of RV function using a percutaneous single PROTEKDuo cannula through the
right IJV with the CentriMag (Thoratec Corp, Pleasanton CA, USA) system and avoidance of re-sternotomy for decannulation. A 70-year-old male
underwent Heartmate II (HMII) placement as a destination therapy. He had a history of atrial fibrillation, severe mitral stenosis, tricuspid
regurgitation (TR), and non-ischemic cardiomyopathy (NICM). He was hospitalized with acute on chronic biventricular decompensated heart
failure (EF 20–25 %) (NYHA IV, INTERMACS 2, ACC/AHA Stage D) four years after a mitral valve replacement and tricuspid valve repair. He had
diabetes mellitus type 2, COPD, chronic kidney disease with baseline creatinine of 1.4–1.7 and on IV Lasix. He was suspected of multifocal
pneumonia and an overall sequela of ongoing progressive advanced heart failure. Three weeks prior to LVAD implant, right heart cath showed
RA of 10 mmHg, RV of 60/10 mmHg, PA of 60/28 (38) mmHg, PAWP of 22 mmHg, V-wave of 40 mmHg, Trans-Pulmonary Gradient of 16 mmHg,
Thermodilution Cardiac Output of 4.85 L/min; Cardiac Index of 2.47 L/min/m2, Fick’s CO of 5.69 L/min and CI of 2.9 L/min/m2, PVR-Pulmonary
Vascular Resistance of 3 Wood units, and SVR-Systemic Vascular Resistance of 627 dyn.s.cm-5. MRI Study showed (BSA-normalized values): RV
EDV: 310 ml (156 ml normalized); RV ESV: 239 ml (120 ml normalized); RV SV: 72 ml (36 ml normalized); RV EF of 23 %); CCO of 5.8 L/min; CCI
of 2.9 L/min/m2. A re-do median sternotomy was performed and cardiopulmonary bypass established with bicaval cannulation. After a repeat of
tricuspid value repair with Kay’s stitch due to severe regurgitation from annular dilatation, a HMII was inserted in standard fashion. The
LVAD was initiated (4.5 L/min, 8200 rpms) but his RV function was acceptable; thus requiring inotropes support (DOB-5 mcg/kg/min;
norepinephrine-15 mcg/kg/min, vasopressin-0.04 units/min and inhaled nitric oxide (iNO) of 40. Swan-Ganz catheter showed CVP of 27 mmHg, PA
of 59/27(37) mmHg, CCO of 5.4 L/min, CCI of 2.6 L/min/m2, and SVR of 755.56 dyn.s.cm-5. TEE demonstrated descent RV function and he was
extubated within 24-hours post-operation. Continuous renal replacement therapy (CRRT) was initiated on postoperative day (POD) two for his
metabolic acidosis and anuria. The patient was re-intubated and sedated POD3 due to respiratory failure. He received one and two units of
packed RBC on POD1 and POD3 respectively. No FFP, CRYO, or platelets were given. Epinephrine was started for RV support and LVAD flow
decreased (5.0 L/min, 8400 rpms). Despite escalating vasopressor and inotropic support (Epi-2mcg/kg/min, DOB-5mcg/kg/min,
Mil-0.125mcg/kg/min, norepinephrine-3mcg/kg/min, vaso-0.04units/min, Phenylephrine-75mcg/kg/min) echocardiography demonstrated refractory
pulmonary hypertension and RVF with PVR of 3 Wood units. Swan-Ganz catheter showed CVP of 17 mmHg, PA of 42/22(29) mmHg, CCO of 5.8 L/min,
CCI of 3.1 L/min/m2, SVR of 575 dyn.s.cm-5. A percutaneous CentriMag RVAD placement with a 29 Fr PROTEKDuo cannula was performed in the
cardiac catheterization lab on POD6 (Fig. 2). Under fluoroscopy, a 0.025 T-J wire was passed through the Swan-Ganz catheter and subsequently
exchanged for a stiffer 0.035 inch T-J wire, extending from the IJV, via brachiocephalic vein and superior vena cava, into the right atrium
(RA) and ventricle, then through the pulmonary valve into the PA. The cannula was passed over the wire and positioned in the RA with outflow
port beyond the pulmonary valve. The proximal and distal cannulae were then connected to the CentriMag system and RVAD was established with
stable flow (3.5 L/min, 3800 rpms). LVAD flow was also increased (7 L/min, 8800 rpms). Cardiac output and hemodynamics improved
exponentially after RVAD placement; reducing the need for pharmacologic support. Sildenafil and iNO were continued. Stabilized RV function
overcame the patient’s pulmonary hypertension, reestablishing adequate pulmonary circulation and sufficient LV filling thereby enabling
proper LVAD function and increased cardiac output. RVAD supported RV recovery facilitating the removal of 13 liters of fluid via CRRT,
improving patient’s volume status. The patient’s heart was stable before device wean and decannulation took place on POD11.Fig. 2Placement
of the PROTEKDuo Cannula. The PROTEKDuo cannula was placed from the right internal jugular vein extending through the right ventricle toward
the pulmonary artery main trunk. The white arrow indicates the tip of cannula Placement of the PROTEKDuo Cannula. The PROTEKDuo cannula was
placed from the right internal jugular vein extending through the right ventricle toward the pulmonary artery main trunk. The white arrow
indicates the tip of cannula High mortality and a poor prognosis with RVF after LVAD implant indicate that treatment of RVF is an important
factor in recovery from HF . The approach described herein further improves upon previously documented minimally invasive procedures . The
PROTEKDuo was positioned via the IJV with inflow port in the RA and outflow port in the PA. Using the CentriMag system, RVAD was established
to augment the failing ventricle. RV function was stabilized, restoring hemodynamics, overcoming the patient’s pulmonary hypertension, and
allowing for 13 liters of fluid removal via CRRT. With improved RV function, the device was weaned and the patient decannulated eleven days
later. Conventional RVAD insertion often requires repeat sternotomy. In comparison, the percutaneous approach decreases blood loss and
potential coagulopathy. Furthermore, the RV can be decompressed without chest opening. However, sometimes the chest is left open for
coagulopathy and RV dilation, potentially increasing the risk of infection . Surgical implantation has effectively facilitated longer
support times than percutaneous RVADs, though utilizing femoral cannulation. Other percutaneous RVAD procedures involve separate inflow and
outflow sites, generally including femoral cannulation . The use of the dual-lumen PROTEKDuo requires only a single insertion site in the
right jugular vein, which allows for expedited mobility and rehabilitation and minimizes lower limb ischemia. The cannula is a 510 K
clearance which stated “a single cannula for both venous drainage and reinfusion of blood via internal jugular vein during extracorporeal
life support (ECLS) procedure”. This 510 K approval process equals this product to the Avalon cannula made by Maquet. To our best knowledge,
there is no FDA approval of ECLS comprising of pump, oxygenator, and cannula. Therefore, the use of PROTEKDuo Cannula with CentriMag pump is
appropriately “off-label”. We cautioned that the maker of these cannula has the right not to sell the cannula. Other centers have proposed
an RVAD implantation technique that does not necessitate resternotomy at the time of RVAD removal, but the concern of bleeding and infection
from the Dacron graft site remains . There are many advantages to using this PROTEKDuo Cannula as an RVAD with the CentriMag. First, the
CentriMag is a reliable temporary pump and this off-pump catherization procedure can be performed in a short timeframe (<1 hours),
minimizing blood loss, transfusion and postoperative inflammation. Furthermore, avoiding a median sternotomy, preserves the sternum for a
later chest re-entry or heart transplant. Patients can be extubated early, and can ambulate early post-operatively without any groin
instrumentation or cannulation; an advantage to previously reported percutaneous RVAD insertion . Furthermore, the combination of CentriMag
and PROTEKDuo cannula would allow us the option of slicing in an Oxygenator should the patient require one. Also, the cannula can robustly
decompress the right heart allowing ventricular recovery and decreased clot formation because of the constant flow through the right
ventricle. Traditional sternal re-entry under emergent conditions is treacherous and cumbersome. This procedure has great utility in
patients with previous cardiac surgery. The procedure is technically easy to establish RVAD support, provides efficient support and
decompression in cardiogenic shock in coagulopathic patients. The disadvantage of having only a single cannula size, limits patients with a
larger BSA. Also, Insertion of the cannula can be tricky requiring fluoroscopy and stiff guidewire to properly tunnel the cannula to the PA.
Finally, we utilize heparin for anticoagulation under guidance of Rotational Thromboelastometry (ROTEM). In conclusion, percutaneous
PROTEKDuo cannula insertion with CentriMag system has provided a novel approach to establish RVAD support in a timely and minimally invasive
technique. This method avoids unnecessary blood transfusion and resternotomy. Further study is warranted to further evaluate superiority
over conventional RVAD approach. The authors thank the OR and ICU staff. TK, ZK, PT, AE, and RS were members of the surgical team. PT, CJ,
and JI were involved in drafting and critical revisions. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. The authors declare that they
have no competing interests. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this case report and any accompanying
images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal.
