Blunt thoracic trauma can rarely result in coronary artery injury. Blunt trauma can result in occlusion of any of the coronary arteries or
can lead to its rupture and bleeding. Traumatic coronary artery occlusion can lead to myocardial infarction, while its rupture and bleeding
can result in hemopericardium and cardiac tamponade, and can be rapidly fatal. Survival after coronary artery rupture in blunt thoracic
trauma is exceedingly rare. We present a case of a young male who sustained a blunt thoracic trauma in a motor vehicle collision, that
resulted in rupture of the left anterior descending (LAD) coronary artery and subsequent cardiac tamponade. Prompt surgical intervention
with pericardiotomy and ligation of the artery has resulted in survival of the patient. In cases of traumatic coronary artery rupture, early
surgical intervention is crucial to avoid mortality. Ligation of the injured coronary is a viable option in selected cases, and can be the
most expeditious option in patients in extremis. Coronary artery injury in blunt chest trauma is uncommon yet potentially fatal. Autopsy
studies reveal an incidence of around 2 % of all cardiac injuries caused by blunt chest trauma [1, 2]. The mechanical energy from trauma
transmitted to coronaries can result in intimal tears, wall dissection, dislodgement or rupture of a pre-existing atherosclerotic plaque,
coronary artery spasm, or coronary artery rupture [1, 3–5]. Fractured ribs from blunt trauma can result in coronary laceration [6, 7].
Lesions that result in subsequent occlusion of the involved coronary artery (like intimal tears, wall dissection, rupture of a pre-existing
atheromatous plaque, and coronary artery spasm) can culminate in myocardial infarction, which can be immediate or delayed . On the other
hand, coronary rupture can result in precipitous development of hemopericardium and cardiac tamponade, and is thought to be universally
fatal . Few case reports exist on coronary artery rupture in blunt chest trauma. In cases were the pericardium remains intact, rapid
development of cardiac tamponade makes survival improbable after such injuries. We present a rare case of left anterior descending (LAD)
coronary artery rupture in a young male following blunt chest trauma in a motor vehicle collision. The patient survived despite developing
cardiac tamponade and circulatory arrest, and was treated by emergency thoracotomy and ligation of the distal LAD. A 26-year-old male, who
was not known to have any risk factors for coronary artery disease, presented to the emergency department after a head-on motor vehicle
collision as unrestrained driver. The patient complained of chest pain and shortness of breath. His GCS was 15/15. He was tachypneic (RR: 45
breaths/min) and tachycardic (HR: 134 beats/min). He was found to be hypotensive upon arrival (BP: 87/54 mmHg), but his blood pressure
normalized following the rapid infusion of two liters of lactated Ringer’s solution. Auscultation of lung fields revealed reduced breath
sounds on the right side. Chest x-ray (CXR) revealed a large right-sided hemothorax. A thoracostomy tube was inserted on the right side
resulting in the immediate drainage of two liters of blood. Initial focused assessment with sonography in trauma (FAST) exam was negative,
but the patient became hypotensive again soon after (BP: 60/40 mmHg). Repeated FAST revealed a moderate amount of fluid in the pericardial
space. The patient was rushed into the operating room for thoracotomy and pericardiotomy. Induction of anesthesia was accompanied by
progressive bradycardia that degenerated rapidly into asystole. A resuscitative thoracotomy (left anterolateral) revealed hemopericardium
and cardiac tamponade. The pericardium was intact. Pericardiotomy and evacuation of more than 200 ml of blood from the pericardium, followed
by internal cardiac massage, resulted in restoration of heart activity after 3 min. With restoration of spontaneous circulation, bleeding
was noticed from a small perforation in the distal LAD near the apex. The distal LAD was ligated proximal to the site of perforation. The
left anterolateral thoracotomy was extended across the midline to the right side into a clamshell thoracotomy to allow for proper
exploration of the right hemithorax. The bleeding was found to arise from multiple injured intercostal vessels, and hemostasis was secured.
The blood pressure started to improve, and the patient was sent to the intensive care unit on mechanical ventilation. Cardiac markers were
all elevated at presentation (CK: 4,267 U/L, Ref. Range 30–200. CK-MB: 226 U/L, Ref. Range <25 U/L. Troponin I: 19.29 ng/ml, Ref. Range
0.04 ng/ml), and continued to rise to reach a peak at 48 h (CK: 32,109 U/L. CK-MB: >1000 U/L. Troponin I: 19.43 ng/ml), after which they
started to decline. A standard 12 lead ECG showed sinus tachycardia with left axis deviation, and a down sloping ST segment depression of
anterolateral leads (V1-V6) with T wave inversion. A transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE) was done on the first postoperative day. It showed a
normal left ventricular (LV) function with an ejection fraction (EF) of 60 %. The echocardiogram did not show any wall motion abnormalities
at that point, and there was no significant valvular pathology. There was considerable difficulty in liberating the patient from mechanical
ventilation due to underlying pulmonary edema and bilateral lung contusions. The patient was extubated after 14 days of mechanical
ventilation. A follow up TTE done 4 weeks later showed a moderate LV systolic dysfunction with an EF of 35 %, and wall motion abnormalities
involving the apical and anterolateral regions. The patient was discharged from hospital few days later on anti-heart failure medication.
Albeit rare, blunt chest trauma may result in the occlusion of any of the coronary arteries or may lead to its rupture and bleeding. Each of
these two patterns of injury is associated with a distinct corresponding patient population, clinical presentation, management, and outcome.
Intimal tears, wall dissection, disruption of atherosclerotic plaque, coronary artery spasm, and epicardial hematomas can result in partial
or complete occlusion of the coronary artery and subsequent myocardial ischemia. Depending on the severity of the occlusion and the rapidity
by which it develops, patients may present with angina pectoris, myocardial infarction, or even heart failure many years after the injury.
Christensen et al. conducted a review on cases of myocardial ischemia following blunt chest trauma . The review showed that 82 % of the 77
studied patients were below the age of 45. All of the reported patients developed myocardial infarction due to occlusive lesions of the
coronary arteries, except for one patient who had angina pectoris without evidence of infarction. The LAD was the most common coronary
involved. Only 5 of the 77 (6.5 %) reported cases died secondary to the coronary artery injury and ischemia. The favorable prognosis was
attributed to the patients’ young age, and to the involvement of a single vessel. Percutaneous transluminal coronary angioplasty (PTCA) and
stenting is thought to be the most suitable treatment in these cases . Rupture or laceration of a coronary artery can result in bleeding
into the pericardial or pleural cavities. Aside from laceration caused by a broken rib [6, 7], the mechanism by which a coronary artery
ruptures is not well understood. Shearing forces from craniocaudal deceleration, and compression of the chest while the patient is holding
his breath (compression-Valsalva injury) have been implicated as possible mechanisms . Sudden increase in the transmural pressure of the
coronary artery, resulting from compression of the heart between the sternum and spine, might lead to rupture when the increase in pressure
exceeds the compliance of the artery. Atherosclerosis results in decreased elasticity of the coronary artery, and turns it into a rigid tube
that is more liable to rupture with sudden increases in transmural pressure [5, 10, 11]. This helps to explain why most of the reported
cases of coronary artery rupture involve older patients with pre-existing coronary artery disease, which is in contrast to the patient
population observed in cases of coronary occlusion, where the majority are below the age of 45 and do not have a pre-existing coronary
artery disease. The right coronary artery (RCA), at or near its origin, is most commonly involved [Table 1]. The accumulation of blood in
the closed pericardial space results in the precipitous development of cardiac tamponade and consequent shock. However, bleeding can occur
into the pleural cavity through a rent in the pericardium. This prevents the rapid development of cardiac tamponade , allowing a longer time
window before the development of shock and subsequent mortality. In contrast to cases of coronary occlusion discussed above where mortality
is due to myocardial ischemia and infarction, hemopericardium and cardiac tamponade are the important sequela of coronary laceration that
contribute to mortality . Injury to other cardiac structures or great vessels in association with the coronary artery injury can increase
mortality. Advanced age and pre-existing coronary artery disease can also play a role in the worse outcome observed in patients with this
pattern of injury when compared to patients with traumatic coronary occlusion.Table 1Summary of reported cases of coronary artery rupture in
blunt thoracic traumaReferenceAge & genderMechanism of injuryDiagnosisPresentationArtery involvedAssociated cardiac injuriesPericardial
defectCoronary artery diseaseManagementTime windowa OutcomeGoffin et al. 1974 .62 MMVCAutopsyDyspnea, chest pain, shock.CXR: Multiple rib
fractures. Slight enlargement of the heart.ECG changes of inf. MI and AV block.Moderately elevated CPK and SGOT.RCAAortic tear. Intimal tear
in LCXPresentPresentPericardiocentesis (failed)9.5 hDiedTrotter et al. 1998 .15 MMVCIntraop.Chest wall contusion. Continuous murmur.
Initially stable vital signs, then worsening dyspnea and cardiogenic shock.CXR: widened cardiac silhouette. RBB on ECG.RCATricuspid
valvePresentN/Ab ACB8 hSurvivedSuzuki et al. 2000 .59 MFDAutopsySevere dyspnea and chest pain 14 h after the incident. CXR: fractures of
left 7th and 8th ribs with left pleural effusion.LADNonePresentN/Ab None17 hDiedDimopoulos et al. 2003 .78 FFDAutopsyAnemia. Massive left
pleural effusion on CXR.Atrial fibrillation and LBBB. Echocardiogram: 700 ml of pericardial effusion with normal ejection
fraction.ICANoneN/Ab N/Ab NoneN/ADiedStraub et al. 2003 .71 MFDIntraop.No visible chest wall lesions. Cardiogenic shock.CXR: normal.
Elevated cardiac enzymes.Echocardiography: pericardial effusion, no wall motion disturbances. CT scan: hemorrhagic pericardial effusion and
para-aortic contrast fluid extravasation.RCANoneNonePresentOPCAB14 hDiedSugimoto et al. 2003 .34 MMVCIntraop.Unconscious and in severe
shock.Echocardiogram: massive hemopericardium.RCANoneN/Ab N/Ab ER thoracotomy with attempted ligation of the RCA. Interval ACB three weeks
later.No delaySurvivedDueholm et al. 2009 .44 MMVCAutopsyChest pain. Normal exam.ECG: Acute MI. CXR: Fractures in left 6th and 7th
ribs.Arrhythmia, followed by cardiogenic shock.RCANoneN/Ab PresentNone.56 hDiedTyson et al. 2010 .69 MMVCIntraop.Breath sounds decreased on
the left. CXR: left hemothorax and widened mediastinum. CT scan: minimal pericardial fluid. Fractures in left 2nd -7th ribs. Tube
thoracostomy drained 2 L of blood.OMPosterior cardiac veinPresentN/Ab Anterolateral thoracotomy and ligation of bleeding
vessels.2 hSurvivedBurcar et al. 2013 .15 MMVCIntraop.Chest wall hematomas. GCS 5/15. Hypotension. ST segment depression. Troponin I & CPK
elevation. Bilateral lung contusions on CT scan.LMIntimal tear in MPAN/Ab N/Ab Sternotomy.Pericardiotomy. LIMA to LAD. SVG to LCX.N/ADied
MVC motor vehicle collision, FD falling down, LAD left anterior descending artery, RCA right coronary artery, LCX circumflex artery, ICM
intermediate coronary artery, OM obtuse marginal artery, LM left main coronary artery, MPA main pulmonary artery, ACB aortocoronary bypass,
OPCAB off pump coronary artery bypass, LIMA left internal mammary artery, SVG saphenous vein graft aTime window between injury and
intervention or death bNo explicit information about the finding was provided in the case report Summary of reported cases of coronary
artery rupture in blunt thoracic trauma MVC motor vehicle collision, FD falling down, LAD left anterior descending artery, RCA right
coronary artery, LCX circumflex artery, ICM intermediate coronary artery, OM obtuse marginal artery, LM left main coronary artery, MPA main
pulmonary artery, ACB aortocoronary bypass, OPCAB off pump coronary artery bypass, LIMA left internal mammary artery, SVG saphenous vein
graft aTime window between injury and intervention or death bNo explicit information about the finding was provided in the case report
Unlike cases of coronary occlusion that has been reported after apparently trivial trauma, the amount of energy needed to rupture a coronary
artery is high and is usually associated with high-speed motor vehicle collisions. The clinical picture is variable and patients may
complain of chest pain and might be hemodynamically unstable. The injury is rarely suspected and the clinical picture is usually attributed
to more common causes of chest pain in blunt chest trauma. ECG changes are non-specific and are usually attributed, along with elevated
cardiac enzymes, to cardiac contusion. CXR may show fractured ribs but coronary artery rupture may occur with an intact thoracic skeleton .
The heart shadow may appear enlarged due to hemopericardium, but a traumatic communication between the pericardial and pleural cavities can
result in the appearance of pleural effusion in its place [6, 7]. Similarly, pericardial effusion, which is the principal manifestation of
coronary artery rupture, can be undetectable or absent on FAST exam if the pericardium is not intact. In addition, bleeding from the
ruptured coronary can seep beneath the epicardium and become contained in the form of an epicardial hematoma that could be missed on FAST
examination or mistaken for chamber dilatation. This phenomenon can also result in failed attempts at pericardiocentesis or subxiphoid
pericardiotomy . Rarely, spasm in the severed coronary artery can result in absence of pericardial effusion despite an intact pericardium .
Contrary to popular belief that such injuries are usually instantly fatal, accounts of coronary artery rupture report a time window ranging
from 2 to 56 h [Table 1]. This time window could theoretically be sufficient to avoid mortality when timely management is provided. Patients
with pericardial effusion or hemodynamic instability should undergo prompt exploratory surgery. As discussed above, pericardiocentesis might
be of limited utility in these cases since it has been observed that blood can accumulate in the form of epicardial hematoma instead of
collecting in the pericardial space. In addition, despite the presence of pericardial effusion, coronary injury was only identified
intraoperatively or at autopsy and was not suspected preoperatively in most reported cases [Table 1]. Therefore, a low threshold for timely
thoracotomy and exploration should be kept in patients with blunt chest trauma and pericardial effusion or hemodynamic instability. More
stable patients, in absence of pericardial effusion, who continue to complain of chest pain or other cardiac symptoms, and those who show
evidence of myocardial ischemia on electrocardiogram or elevated cardiac enzymes, can undergo formal echocardiogram followed by coronary
angiogram to detect any coronary injury. Operative options in the management of coronary artery rupture include ligation or
revascularization. The choice of incision is dictated by the clinical situation. A left anterolateral thoracotomy incision is used in
patients who need an emergency department or resuscitative thoracotomy, while median sternotomy is preferred in the more stable patient. The
left anterolateral incision can be extended across the midline to the right side into a clamshell thoracotomy for better exposure if needed.
The decision to ligate or revascularize the injured coronary artery depends on the amount of ventricular mass that would be affected by the
interruption of the artery, and on the physiologic status of the patient. Distal injuries in main coronary arteries, and most injuries in
secondary coronary arteries such as the diagonal, obtuse marginal, or acute marginal coronary arteries, can be treated by ligation. Ligation
in such injuries might result in a small area of infarction that does not usually lead to significant cardiac dysfunction . In contrast,
ligation of proximal injuries in main coronary arteries might result in a widespread infarct, with consequent intractable heart failure and
fatal arrhythmias. Revascularization is typically indicated in these injuries. However, it is theorized that the majority of patients with
significant proximal coronary artery injuries suffer widespread cardiac ischemia, fibrillate, and die earlier in their course of injury,
such that survival to care is an implicit indicator that ligating the injured coronary artery is likely to be tolerated by the patient . In
patients with severe physiologic derangements and a proximal coronary artery injury, who are unlikely to tolerate an immediate
revascularization procedure, it is appropriate to use a damage control approach by ligating the artery, resuscitating and rewarming the
patient, correcting coagulopathy, and performing revascularization on a later date if needed. Intra-aortic balloon pump can be used as a
temporary measure in patients who develop cardiac dysfunction after coronary artery ligation . Cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB) has
traditionally been used for coronary revascularization in the acute setting. Full systemic heparinization required for the extracorporeal
circulation in CPB can be hazardous in patients with multiple injuries or suspected central nervous system injury. The use of off –pump
coronary artery bypass grafting (OPCAB) can reduce coagulopathy and transfusion requirement, and have the added benefit of attenuated
inflammatory response in comparison with conventional, on-pump, coronary artery bypass grafting (CABG) . These benefits are of particular
importance in trauma patients. Nevertheless, OPCAB entails performing a vascular anastomosis on a beating heart, which requires specialized
cardiovascular surgical skills and familiarity with the different mechanical stabilizers used in the procedure. These requirements might be
an issue in the acute setting of trauma. The on-pump beating heart procedure poses the same requirements as OPCAB in terms of specialized
skills and availability of special equipment, yet have the downside of an extracorporeal circuit, making the value of this procedure
questionable in the trauma patient. Heparin bonded circuits have been shown to decrease the incidence of postoperative blood transfusion
(but not the postoperative blood loss) following open heart surgery , and could be of some value in trauma patients. In the rare instance
when a partial coronary artery rupture is identified preoperatively, coronary angiogram and stenting over the rupture can be utilized in
stable patients. [Figure 1] shows a proposed algorithm for the management of coronary artery rupture identified intra-operatively in the
multi-trauma patient. It is important to keep in mind that the lack of large studies looking into the different lines of treatment in this
area makes definitive statements on the most appropriate medical intervention difficult to make.Fig. 1A proposed algorithm for the
management of a ruptured coronary artery identified intra-operatively in a multi-trauma patient. CABG: coronary artery bypass grafting.
IABP: intra-aortic balloon pump. OPCAB: off-pump coronary artery bypass A proposed algorithm for the management of a ruptured coronary
artery identified intra-operatively in a multi-trauma patient. CABG: coronary artery bypass grafting. IABP: intra-aortic balloon pump.
OPCAB: off-pump coronary artery bypass Coronary artery rupture is a rare occurrence in blunt trauma, and high index of suspicion is needed
to identify these injuries. Low threshold for exploratory surgery should be kept in patients manifesting pericardial effusion or hemodynamic
instability. These injuries are compatible with a short period of survival, and may be survivable with proper resuscitation and timely
surgery. Many of these injuries can be safely treated by ligation. ACB, aortocoronary bypass; CABG, coronary artery bypass grafting; CXR,
chest x-ray; EF, ejection fraction; FAST, focused assessment with sonography in trauma; FD, falling down; IABP, intra-aortic balloon pump;
ICM, intermediate coronary artery; LAD, left anterior descending artery; LCX, circumflex artery; LIMA, left internal mammary artery; LM,
left main coronary artery; LV, left ventricular; MPA, main pulmonary artery; MVC, motor vehicle collision; OM, obtuse marginal artery;
OPCAB, off –pump coronary artery bypass; PTCA, percutaneous transluminal coronary angioplasty; RCA, right coronary artery; SVG, saphenous
vein graft; TTE, transthoracic echocardiogram We would like to thank Elizabeth Alverson for helping us in the revision of the final draft of
the manuscript. JHA, AIA, RSY, SA, YMK treated the patient. JHA, SA, YMK collected the patient’s data. JHA, HHA, AMA, AAA, MHA, MIA, NRA
performed the literature review. JHA wrote the manuscript and RSY revised and edited the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final
manuscript. The authors declare that they have no competing interests. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for
publication of this case report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of
this journal.
