Endoscopic ultrasound-guided biliary drainage (EUS-BD) is an attractive option for patients who cannot undergo conventional endoscopic
retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) and do not want surgery or percutaneous drainage procedures. We present the use of EUS-antegrade
(EUS-AG) insertion of a self-expandable metal stent (SEMS) in a patient with a common hepatic duct cholangiocarcinoma, as well as a huge
gastric lipoma, after recurrent biliary obstruction of a prior SEMS inserted via ERCP in the same session as a duodenal stent insertion for
gastric outlet obstruction. Endoscopic ultrasound-guided biliary drainage (EUS-BD) is becoming an attractive option for patients who cannot
undergo conventional endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) and do not want surgery or percutaneous drainage procedures. EUS-
antegrade (EUS-AG) interventions are one of the EUS-BD techniques that are used in cases where access to the papilla is not possible either
after surgical interventions or because of obstruction from a neoplastic process. In this case report, we present the use of EUS-AG in a
case where there was a self-expandable metal stent (SEMS) inserted but became blocked, and at the same time access to the papilla was
prohibited by neoplastic obstruction of the duodenum. A 77-year-old male was referred to our endoscopy unit for the evaluation of abdominal
pain and a lesion that was observed in the hilum of the liver on cross-sectional imaging. On esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD), he was found
to have a large submucosal lesion in the antrum of the stomach. The lesion was occupying the majority of the antrum and had an ulcer.
Computerized tomography (CT) demonstrated a large, fat density, submucosal mass measuring 13 × 12 × 5.5 cm. A diagnosis of a large stomach
lipoma was made. An EUS was performed that demonstrated a lesion at the level of the hepatic duct; a fine-needle aspiration (FNA) was
performed and was proven to be a cholangiocarcinoma. The patient was not a surgical candidate and was started on palliative chemotherapy.
Five months later, the patient presented with jaundice and was found to have biliary obstruction on imaging. An ERCP demonstrated a common
hepatic duct stricture approximately 2.5 cm in length with dilatation of the proximal biliary tree (Klatskin tumor type II) [Figure 1]. An
uncovered SEMS was inserted and his symptom resolved [Figure 2]. Initial endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography; common hepatic duct
stricture with proximal biliary dilatation Deployment of an uncovered self-expandable metal stent in the biliary system After 4 months, the
patient presented with jaundice and elevated liver enzymes and was found to have stent dysfunction. The second ERCP demonstrated narrowing
at the proximal end of the SEMS due to ingrowth. A 7 Fr, 12 cm long plastic biliary stent was inserted with good biliary drainage [Figure
3]. Insertion of a plastic stent in the blocked self-expandable metal stent Four months after his second ERCP, he presented with repeated
nausea and vomiting, and he was also noted to have jaundice and some itching. On imaging, the plastic stent had migrated distally and the
biliary obstruction had recurred. An EGD demonstrated gastric outlet obstruction, with narrowing mainly at the junction of the first and
second part of the duodenum that was passed with difficulty even after using a controlled radial expansion balloon. An uncovered 10 cm long
metallic duodenal stent was inserted smoothly passing the stenotic area. An EUS-AG drainage procedure was planned for two reasons; (1)
reaching the papilla was difficult using a duodenoscope due to the stenosis and (2) a percutaneous drainage procedure was not possible due
to a large soft tissue mass in the right hypochondrial area that was thought to be a metastatic deposit. Initially, the biliary tree was
punctured from the left lobe of the liver using a 19-guage FNA needle, and after confirming the correct position of the needle by aspirating
bile and injecting contrast a cholangiogram was obtained [Figure 4]. A guidwire was advanced through the needle and through the prior SEMS
into the duodenum. A straight catheter was then advanced and then the track was dilated using a 4-mm biliary balloon. The proximal end of
the SEMS was also dilated using the same balloon. A 12 cm long uncovered SEMS was placed antegradely and co-axially into the initial SEMS
and overlapping both the proximal and distal ends [Figures 5 and 6]. After deployment of a duodenal stent, access into the biliary tree was
confirmed with an endoscopic ultrasound cholangiogram through the left lobe of the liver. Note that the plastic stent has migrated distally
After advancing a wire through the endoscopic ultrasound needle through the papilla and dilation of the track a self-expandable metal stent
is inserted co-axially and overlapped both ends of the original stent Final image after deployment of the self-expandable metal stent The
patient improved in the form of nausea and vomiting, and the jaundice and his itching resolved. He resumed his palliative chemotherapy. The
majority of patients who develop malignant biliary obstruction present at a stage when the management is mainly palliative. In such cases,
the initial endoprosthesis that should be used is a SEMS because it has a longer duration of patency and is more cost-effective, even in
those with a short life-expectancy. In our patient, we had inserted an uncovered SEMS during the initial ERCP because we had mapped the
location of the stricture using cross-sectional imaging as well as MRCP and the patient was not a surgical candidate. This initial
assessment is important because it decreases the need for repeated procedures and potential morbidity. The use of the uncovered SEMS was
chosen as there is no clear added benefit from using a covered or partially covered SEMS. Despite that, the patient developed recurrent
biliary obstruction because of ingrowth into the SEMS; we used a plastic stent as a method of achieving biliary drainage. In cases where
conventional biliary drainage cannot be performed, EUS-BD is an attractive option. Furthermore, an EUS-BD would enable the patient to resume
his chemotherapy without disruption compared to a surgical drainage procedure. In addition, percutaneous drainage was not an attractive
option to the patient due to the external drain that would be required with its associated care of frequent flushing, as well as the
multiple procedures that would be required if a percutaneous biliary SEMS would be contemplated. We chose to perform an EUS-AG stent
insertion because it has the advantage of avoiding a non-natural fistula between the gastrointestinal track and the biliary system, as in
the case of choledocoduodenostomy or hepaticogastrostomy. A retrograde insertion of an SEMS would be preferable compared to an antegrade
insertion when feasible, as it has been shown to have a lower complication rate (13.9% vs. 32%, P = 0.07). An EUS- rendezvous technique was
not possible in our case due to the duodenal obstruction. This case demonstrates a few interesting points; patients with malignant biliary
obstruction display variable survival periods based on the underlying malignancy and even within the same tumor type. In addition, this case
demonstrates the feasibility of the use of EUS-AG even in cases with a prior SEMS in place as well as an attractive option of performing
multiple stenting procedures in the same session where the patient had both duodenal stenting as well as the EUS-AG in the same setting
under conscious sedation. EUS-AG does have limitations; it is considered an advanced endoscopic procedure that requires expertise as well as
an adequate support system of interventional radiologists as well as surgeons, if and when adverse events occur, and in cases were technical
or clinical success is not achieved. Moreover, EUS-AG might be inappropriate in the setting of advanced hilar strictures, and a
hepaticogastrostomy might be more appropriate. The applications of EUS-AG as a revision and primary drainage procedure is relatively new,
and the clinical applications are still evolving but can have equivalent success rates and procedure times compared to ERCP inserted biliary
SEMS and potentially a lower incidence of pancreatitis. This procedure was also found to have a higher technical as well as functional
success rate in cases with duodenal obstruction where positioning of the duodenoscope into the second part of the duodenum is not possible.
In conclusion, this case demonstrates the applicability and usefulness of EUS-AG in the setting of recurrent biliary obstruction after an
initial SEMS insertion. College of Medicine Research Center, Deanship of Scientific Research, King Saud University through the Research
Group Project number RGP-279. There are no conflicts of interest. The authors would like to extend their sincere appreciation to the
Deanship of Scientific Research at King Saud University for funding of this research through the Research Group Project number RGP-279.
