Authors’ Contribution: Study Design Data Collection Statistical Analysis Data Interpretation Manuscript Preparation Literature Search Funds
Collection Conflict of interest: None declared Patient: Male, 27 Final Diagnosis: Burkitt lymphoma with intracardiac mass Symptoms:
Dizziness • fatigue • palpitations • weight loss Medication: — Clinical Procedure: Catheter-directed thrombolytic therapy with intracardiac
infusion of alteplase Specialty: Hematology Rare disease Non-neoplastic causes such as infections and thrombi account for most intracardiac
masses. Primary tumors such as myxomas and metastasis from breast cancer, lung cancer, or melanomas account for many of the remaining cases.
Burkitt lymphoma manifesting as an intracardiac mass is a rare entity, with 21 cases reported in the English literature. We report the case
of a man infected with human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) who presented with non-specific cardiac symptoms and was later found to have
intracardiac mass caused by Burkitt lymphoma. His rapid decline with unexpected complications was reversed with prompt management.
Subsequent to induction, the patient achieved a near complete response with considerable improvement in his condition. Lymphoma should be
considered in the differential diagnosis of intracardiac masses. Associated cardiac symptoms are frequently non-specific and can often be
overlooked or underappreciated. Burkitt lymphoma has a short doubling time and an intracardiac lesion can become life-threatening in a
matter of days. Early recognition and prompt treatment are crucial to achieving optimal outcomes. Burkitt lymphoma (BL) constitutes less
than 1% of all non-Hodgkin lymphomas (NHL) , and this percentage increases to 25% to 30% in patients with human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)
infection . The incidence of cardiac involvement with NHL ranges from 9% to 24% in autopsy series . This has increased steadily over time
due to increased life expectancy of immunocompromised individuals and improvement in diagnostic tests . Diffuse large B cell lymphoma is the
most common lymphoma involving the heart. BL manifesting as an intracardiac mass is extremely rare, with only 21 reported cases in the
English literature. We report a case in an HIV-infected patient followed by a review of the published literature. A 27-year-old white man
presented with palpitations and dizziness of a few days duration. He also complained of 3 months of fatigue and an 18-kg weight loss. He was
diagnosed with HIV infection 5 years ago and was compliant with his antiretroviral therapy (combination of elvitegravir, cobicistat,
emtricitabine, and tenofovir). The patient denied any history of substance abuse. Pertinent physical findings included irregular pulse with
tachycardia, tachypnea, and elevated blood pressure. His oxygen saturation was normal (95%) on room air. An ejection systolic murmur was
heard at the left lower sternal border, and his liver was palpable 3 cm below the costal margin. Laboratory work-up revealed a CD4+ T cell
count of 79 cells/μL with HIV RNA copies of 90/mL. Complete blood count revealed a white blood count of 9100/μL, hemoglobin 12.3 g/dL, and
platelet count of 701 000/μL. Occasional premature ventricular complexes were noted on his electrocardiogram. Computed tomography (CT) scan
of the abdomen and pelvis showed multiple liver lesions, the largest measuring 7.8×6.2×10.1 cm (Figure 1A). A CT scan of the chest
demonstrated a 7-cm lesion within the right atrium (Figure 1B) with bilateral pleural effusions. Masses were noted in the mediastinum,
lungs, pancreas, kidneys, and ilium. An initial transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE) revealed a solid (5×4.3 cm) right atrial mass, invading
the base of the right ventricular free wall and the interatrial septum (Figure 2A, 2B). A small amount of pericardial effusion was also
noted. There was no valvular involvement and the ejection fraction was preserved. Three-dimensional transesophageal echocardiography (TEE)
showed that the quantitated volume of the right atrial mass was 29 mL. An ultrasound-guided biopsy of the largest liver lesion revealed a
diffuse sheet-like proliferation of intermediate-to-large lymphoid cells with irregular nuclei (Figure 3A). Many areas demonstrated a
prominent starry sky appearance with scattered macrophages (Figure 3B). Scattered mitotic activity was noted with areas of apoptosis. On
immunoperoxidase stains, the neoplastic cells were strongly and diffusely positive for LCA, CD20, BCL6, and CD10 and had a Ki-67 positivity
of 100%. They were negative for CD45RO, BCL1, BCL2, PLAP, AE1/AE3, and Cam 5.2. Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) showed
rearrangement of myc and IgH t (8, 14) genes. A diagnosis of acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) with stage IVB Burkitt lymphoma was
made. The insertion of an Ommaya reservoir was planned in anticipation of intrathecal chemotherapy. However, the surgery was abandoned when
the patient became hypoxic during induction of general anesthesia. He subsequently developed hypotension and went into cardiogenic shock. A
repeat echocardiogram revealed severe tricuspid valve stenosis due to the rapidly growing intra-atrial tumor, which now extended into the
right ventricle. A new right atrial mass consistent with a thrombus was also noted. A diagnosis of cardiac thrombosis overlying the
intracardiac tumor was made. Chemotherapy with modified cyclophosphamide, vincristine, doxorubicin, and methotrexate/ifosfamide, etoposide,
cytarabine (CODOX-M/IVAC regimen) was started. The reason this regimen was chosen instead of a regimen with rituximab is because HIV-
positive patients with low CD4 counts often do poorly with rituximab and have increased rates of infection-related deaths. Although recent
studies suggest there might be some benefits, these data were not available at the time of this patient’s care, and thus it was not
incorporated into our management decision. Catheter-directed thrombolytic therapy with intracardiac infusion of alteplase was given for 5
days. The patient showed a rapid response to therapy with improvement in organ function and he was discharged 3 weeks later. He completed 4
cycles of chemotherapy with a complete resolution of his symptoms and cardiac murmur. The intracardiac mass was notably decreased to 2.0×1.4
cm (previously 5×4.3 cm) on TTE (Figure 4) with quantitated volume reduced to 5 mL (previously 29 mL) on TEE. CT scans of the chest and
abdomen revealed complete resolution of his pleural effusions and renal masses, with the mediastinal and retroperitoneal lymphadenopathy
showing significant response. BL is a highly aggressive subset of B cell NHL. It is an uncommon disease in adults, accounting for less than
1% of all NHL . HIV patients have a 200-fold increased risk of developing NHL, with 25% to 30% of these being BL or Burkitt-like lymphoma .
Unlike other types of HIV-associated lymphomas, these patients often have CD4 counts greater than 200 cells/µL . HIV-associated BL are more
likely to have atypical presentations with extra-nodal disease and liver, lung, and other organ involvement . Intracardiac mass secondary to
BL is rare. The usual causes of intracardiac masses are non-neoplastic (e.g., structural abnormalities, infections, thrombi, and
hamartomas). Neoplastic causes can be metastasis to the heart or primary cardiac tumors, with the former being more common . About 90% of
all primary cardiac tumors are benign and include myxomas, papillary fibroelastomas, fibromas, lipomas, angiomas, and rhabdomyomas .
Sarcomas are the most common malignant primary cardiac tumors, accounting for 95% of cases, and mesotheliomas and lymphomas account for the
rest . The metastatic intracardiac tumors usually arise from breast or lung cancer, melanoma, or lymphomas . Primary cardiac lymphomas (PCL)
or lymphomas involving only the heart and/or pericardium has an estimated incidence of less than 0.05% [3, 11]. According to the largest
published review of PCL, only 197 published cases of PCL were reported from 1949 to 2009. Of these, only 13 (6.6%) were BL . Disseminated
NHL with cardiac involvement has a higher incidence (9% to 24%) compared to PCL, but there are suggestions that these entities might not be
as distinct as previously thought. PCL has a propensity to involve the superior vena cava (SVC) and the right side of the heart, which are
the areas that receive lymph drainage from the thoracic duct. It is hypothesized that PCL could be merely a manifestation of occult systemic
lymphoma (spreading to the heart by the thoracic duct) instead of a primarily cardiac issue . Regardless of the origin, an intracardiac mass
caused by BL is exceedingly rare. To the best of our knowledge, there are only 21 reported cases in the English literature (Table 1). We
excluded 4 cases that might have met our criteria, because the articles were not available in English. Older cases reported as Burkitt-like
or small non-cleaved cell type on pathology were included unless otherwise specified. Among the 22 cases (including present case), all 3
types of BL were represented (9/22 (41%) sporadic, 4/22 (18%) endemic, and 9/22 (41%) immunodeficiency-associated). Most were men (17/22
(77%)). The age ranged from 4 to 78 years, with a median of 38 years, much younger than the median age for PCL in adults, which is
approximately 60 years . The reason for this predilection for intracardiac involvement in younger patients remains unclear. Common
presenting symptoms include dyspnea, palpitation, dizziness, and B-symptoms, which are consistent with prior studies on cardiac lymphoma .
There were 9/22 (41%) HIV-positive cases, 7/22 (32%) HIV-negative cases, and HIV status was not reported in 6/22 (27%). The disease was
right-sided in 16/22 (82%) cases. Patients received standard chemotherapy regimens such as EPOCH (etoposide, prednisone, vincristine,
cyclophosphamide, and doxorubicin) or CHOP (cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincristine, and prednisone) with or without rituximab, Hyper-
CVAD (cyclophosphamide, vincristine, doxorubicin, and dexamethasone), and CODOX-M. A total of 10/22 (45%) patients died. No treatments were
reported for 6/10 (60%) patients that died. Most of these patients died within a few days of diagnosis, 9/10 (90%), and 1 died 6 weeks after
diagnosis. BL was diagnosed at autopsy in 2 cases. The longest surviving patient was reported to be alive at 36 months after diagnosis. It
is well known that BL is a highly aggressive tumor, but in the presence of cardiac involvement, it seems to lead to even more complications
and worse outcomes. Symptoms of dyspnea or palpitations are common in BL patients, most of whom do not have any intracardiac involvement. BL
has a rapid doubling time, and intracardiac involvement can become life-threatening very quickly, as seen in our patient. Keeping a high
index of suspicion for possible intra-cardiac involvement is vital. Pericardial effusion and arrhythmias frequently accompany intracardiac
lymphomas . TTE is the preferred diagnostic modality . Trans-esophageal echocardiogram (TEE) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) are
helpful in equivocal cases . Immunosuppression, presence of extra-cardiac disease, left ventricle involvement, and absence of arrhythmia are
associated with poor prognosis . Surgery and radiation therapy have not shown any benefit . Early treatment with anthracycline-based
chemotherapy is associated with the best outcome . BL causing intracardiac mass is rare, with only 21 cases reported in the English
literature. The cardiac symptoms are frequently non-specific and can often be overlooked or underappreciated in the presence of the
impressive extra-cardiac disease. Due to the aggressive nature of BL, the cardiac tumor can progress and become life-threatening very
quickly. Any delay in diagnosis or treatment can decrease the chances of survival. Our patient is a good reminder that early detection,
treatment, and optimization of cardiac parameters can potentially mean the difference between life and death in these patients. We thank the
excellent support provided by Dr. Rachel M. Haake from the Department of Anesthesiology at Maricopa Integrated Health System (MIHS) for
valuable patient information and Dr. Prahlad Patel from the Department of Pathology at MIHS for preparing the histologic images. Financial
grants None. Conflicts of interest The authors declare that there is no conflict of interest regarding the publication of this paper. (A) CT
scan of the abdomen and pelvis shows multiple, hypodense lesions in the liver (arrows). (B) CT scan of the chest shows the right atrial mass
(arrow). (A) Pretreatment 2-dimensional TTE shows a 5×4.3-cm right atrial mass (arrow) (crosshairs represent dimension measurements). (B)
Apical 4-chamber view (top left) of the mass (arrow) and another image plane (bottom left) combined to generate a 3-dimensional
reconstruction of the mass (right). LA – left atrium; LV – left ventricle; RA – right atrium; RV – right ventricle. (A) Hematoxylin and
eosin stains of liver biopsy at 400× magnification demonstrate diffuse sheet-like proliferation of intermediate to large tumor cells with
irregular nuclei. (B) Hematoxylin and eosin stains of liver biopsy at 40× magnification demonstrate areas of prominent starry sky appearance
with scattered macrophages. Post-treatment 2-dimensional TTE shows a 2.0×1.4 cm right atrial mass (arrow). LA – left atrium; LV – left
ventricle; RA – right atrium; RV – right ventricle. Published case reports of Burkitt lymphoma causing intracardiac mass. Burkitt-like or
highly likely Burkitt; small non-cleaved cell type. Ara-C – cytarabine; BLE – bilateral lower extremity; CHOP – cyclophosphamide,
doxorubicin, vincristine, prednisone; CODOX-M – cyclophosphamide, vincristine, doxorubicin, and methotrexate; COP – cyclophosphamide,
vincristine, prednisone; COPADM – cyclophosphamide, vincristine, prednisone, doxorubicin, methotrexate; CP – chest pain; CVAD –
cyclophosphamide, vincristine, doxorubicin, dexamethasone; CYM – Ara-C, methotrexate; D – deceased; D/C – discharged; EPOCH – etoposide,
prednisone, vincristine, cyclophosphamide, and doxorubicin; F – fever; HA – headache; HD – high-dose; LA – left atrium; LN – lymph node; LTF
– lost to follow-up; LV – left ventricle; m – month(s); M – man; MTX – methotrexate; N/A – information not available; Neg – negative; + –
positive; R – remission; R-CHOP – rituximab, cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincristine, prednisone; R-EPOCH – rituximab, etoposide,
prednisone, vincristine, cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin; RA – right atrium; RV – right ventricle; SOB – shortness of breath; TV – tricuspid
valve; W – woman; wks – weeks; WL – weight loss; yrs – years.
