We encountered two patients with overlapping features of primary biliary cholangitis and autoimmune hepatitis within the same family. A
68-year-old woman presented at our hospital from a previous medical institution because of the diagnosis of primary biliary cholangitis. Her
49-year-old daughter was admitted with liver dysfunction 4 years later. When compared, these two related patients were found to have
overlapping features of primary biliary cholangitis and autoimmune hepatitis. Their human leukocyte antigen haplotype was
DRB1*04:05/DRB1*15:02. The clinical and biochemical findings of these two patients immediately improved following treatment with a
combination of prednisolone and ursodeoxycholic acid, in accordance with the Japanese guidelines. It is extremely important to identify such
pathological conditions as quickly as possible, particularly with the appearance of severe liver dysfunction due to liver cirrhosis, as
observed in our case. The Japanese guidelines are considered to be a realistic and useful clinical policy for the swift and efficient
treatment of patients with overlapping features of primary biliary cholangitis and autoimmune hepatitis. We suggest that our two patients
presented with a genetic predisposition to autoimmune liver disease with overlapping features of primary biliary cholangitis and autoimmune
hepatitis within the same family. Primary biliary cholangitis (PBC) and autoimmune hepatitis (AIH) are both considered to be autoimmune
diseases of the liver. Although they share the autoimmune aspect, their pathogenesis, clinical features, disease course, and response to
therapy are quite distinct. PBC is a slowly progressive disease primarily of the intrahepatic bile ducts, with a strong preponderance of
females and a median age of 50 years at diagnosis. However, familial PBC is rare (~1–6 % of PBC cases) and an earlier study suggested that
human leukocyte antigen (HLA)-DR8 represents a risk factor for developing PBC . Therapy with ursodeoxycholic acid (UDCA) appears to slow the
progression of this disease. On the other hand, AIH is a chronic disorder characterized by continuing hepatocellular necrosis and
inflammation, usually with fibrosis, which can evolve into liver cirrhosis and failure. AIH commonly affects young women, who usually
exhibit characteristic autoantibodies and a characteristic immunogenetic background involving HLA-B8, DR3, or DR4 . Familial cases of AIH
are reported to occur in only 1 % of AIH cases . Moreover, response to immunosuppressive therapy is usually prompt in this disease,
resulting in a good long-term prognosis . Patients with overlapping features of PBC and AIH have been recognized for some time. Although the
prevalence of autoimmune liver disease with overlapping features of PBC and AIH has been reported to vary considerably (2.1–19 %) , there
are few reports of cases occurring within the same family. Here we report overlapping features of PBC and AIH in the mother and daughter of
the same family. Case 1: a 68-year-old woman was admitted to a previous medical institution because of liver dysfunction. She was diagnosed
with PBC by the following biochemical and serological findings: aspartate aminotransferase (AST) 212 U/L, alanine aminotransferase (ALT)
203 U/L, total bilirubin (T-Bil) 0.9 mg/dL, alkaline phosphatase (ALP) 491 U/L, γ-glutamyl transpeptidase (γ-GTP) 212 U/L, immunoglobulin
(Ig) M 534 mg/dL, and anti-mitochondrial antibody (AMA) titer 1:80. Ultrasonography (US) and computed tomography (CT) showed morphological
changes indicative of liver cirrhosis. Although the patient was immediately treated with 600 mg UDCA, the response to this treatment was not
sufficient. She was referred by another medical institution to our hospital for further, more detailed examinations and was subsequently
admitted to our hospital due to further liver dysfunction and progressive symptoms over the previous 4 weeks, including general fatigue,
appetite loss, and muscle cramp in her legs. Her initial laboratory tests revealed liver dysfunction with an antinuclear antibody (ANA)
titer of 1:320 with a homogeneous pattern, and elevation of IgG to 3,517 mg/dL (Table 1). Serological examinations for hepatitis A virus
(HAV), hepatitis B virus (HBV), and hepatitis C virus (HCV) were all negative (Table 1). There was no history of symptoms suggestive of
viral infection. International AIH score on the basis of the simplified International Autoimmune Hepatitis Group (IAIHG) scoring system and
the revised AIH scoring system was 6 points and 13 points, respectively, implying a probable AIH [6, 7]. The HLA-DRB1 haplotype was
DRB1*04:05/DRB1*15:02. Although the patient had ingested some health foods, liver dysfunction had not improved when these foods were
stopped. Drug-induced lymphocyte stimulation tests for such food types were negative. Thus, the patient was eventually diagnosed on the
basis of both the Paris criteria and Japanese guidelines with an autoimmune liver disease with overlapping features of PBC and AIH [4, 8].
We immediately administered 5 mg/day prednisolone (PSL) and 600 mg/day of UDCA . The PSL dose given was smaller than that indicated by the
Japanese guidelines because of the complication of liver cirrhosis and the consequent increased risk of opportunistic infections,
osteoporosis, and abnormalities in glucose metabolism. This course of treatment resulted in improvements to clinical and biochemical
findings within 1 month. Since then, liver function has remained within the normal range, resulting in a constant liver cirrhotic condition
of Child–Pugh class A (Fig. 1). Furthermore, the current level of bone mineral density (BMD) is 0.396 g/cm2 greater than the normal range
(0.261–0.333 g/cm2), although we continue to administer PSL at a dose of 5 mg/day.Table 1Laboratory data at the first medical examination
and comparison of environmental and genetic factors between all family membersCase 1 (mother)Case 2 (daughter 1)Daughter 2Age
(years)68 49 48 Biochemistry TP (6.5–8.3) (g/dL)7.88.47.3 Alb (3.8–5.3) (g/dL)2.93.94.4 T.Bil (0.2–1.2) (mg/dL)4.254.790.56 AST (5–40)
(IU/L)328120313 ALT (3–35) (IU/L)312142510 γ-GTP (10–60) (IU/L)6020820 ALP (100–340) (IU/L)418900149Hematology WBC (4000–8000)
(/μL)340051006400 RBC (350–480) (×104/μL)316446436 Hb (11.5–16.0) (g/dL)10.814.713.8 Plt (12.0–40.0) (×104/uL)11.821.126.6 PT %
(%)41.679.894.0 APTT (26–38) (s)41.035.127.7Serology IgG (820–1740) (mg/dL)351722611249 IgA (90–400) (mg/dL)370386121 IgM (52–270)
(mg/dL)491203173 ANA (0–79)×320×80<40 AMA (0–19)(×80)×40Not tested AMA-M2 (0.0–6.9)161.955.875.7 ASMA (0–19)<20<20Not tested Anti-LKM1
(0–16.9)<5.05.2Not testedViral marker IgM anti-HA––Not tested HBs-Ag––– HCV-Ab––– IgM anti-HBc (0–0.9)(−)–Not tested IgG anti-HBc
(0–0.99)(−)–Not tested HCV–RNA (PCR)(−)–Not tested HLA-DRB1 haplotypeDRB1*04:05, DRB1*15:02DRB1*04:05, DRB1*15:02DRB1*04:05,
DRB1*01:01Smoking status/alcohol consumptionNon-smoker/nilNon-smoker/nilNon-
smoker/nilOccupationHousewife18 years–presentNurse20 years–presentNurse20 years–presentPeriod of time living with
motherBirth–20 yearsBirth–20 yearsPrevious medical historyUnremarkableUnremarkableUnremarkableMedication useNilNilNilObstetric history2
deliveries3 deliveries2 deliveriesSerological evidence of past infection Epstein–barr virus++Not tested Cytomegalovirus++Not tested(−)
Serological findings of a previous medical institution, ANA antinuclear antibody, AMA anti-mitochondrial antibody, AMA-M2 anti-mitochondrial
antibody-M2, ASMA anti-smooth muscle antibody, LKM1 liver–kidney microsome type 1, HLA human leukocyte antigenNormal ranges given in
parentheses Fig. 1Clinical course of case 1 (mother). Following diagnosis with an autoimmune liver disease with overlapping features of
primary biliary cholangitis and autoimmune hepatitis, the patient was treated with a combination of 600 mg/day ursodeoxycholic acid (UDCA)
and 5 mg/day prednisolone (PSL) in accordance with the Japanese guidelines, resulting in the gradual improvement of both clinical and
biochemical findings. Key: ANA antinuclear antibody, AMA-M2 anti-mitochondrial antibody-M2 Laboratory data at the first medical examination
and comparison of environmental and genetic factors between all family members (−) Serological findings of a previous medical institution,
ANA antinuclear antibody, AMA anti-mitochondrial antibody, AMA-M2 anti-mitochondrial antibody-M2, ASMA anti-smooth muscle antibody, LKM1
liver–kidney microsome type 1, HLA human leukocyte antigen Normal ranges given in parentheses Clinical course of case 1 (mother). Following
diagnosis with an autoimmune liver disease with overlapping features of primary biliary cholangitis and autoimmune hepatitis, the patient
was treated with a combination of 600 mg/day ursodeoxycholic acid (UDCA) and 5 mg/day prednisolone (PSL) in accordance with the Japanese
guidelines, resulting in the gradual improvement of both clinical and biochemical findings. Key: ANA antinuclear antibody, AMA-M2 anti-
mitochondrial antibody-M2 Case 2: a 49-year-old daughter was diagnosed with liver dysfunction for the first time during medical
examinations. She had a variety of symptoms, including general fatigue and darkness of the urine for 2 weeks previously. She visited our
hospital and was admitted because of visible jaundice and laboratory tests indicative of liver dysfunction: ALT 1425 U/L, AST 1203 U/L, ALP
900 U/L, γ-GTP 208 U/L, T-Bil 4.79 mg/dL, AMA titer 1:40, a positive AMA-M2 antibody, ANA 1:80 of the speckled type, and elevation of IgG to
2261 mg/dL (Table 1). Serological examinations for HAV, HBV, and HCV were all negative (Table 1). There was no history of symptoms
suggestive of viral infection. The revised AIH score was 14 points, implying a probable AIH. However, the simplified IAIHG score was 7
points, implying a definite AIH [6, 7]. US and CT ruled out obstructive jaundice. The HLA-DRB1 haplotype was DRB1*04:05/DRB1*15:02, as
observed with case 1. There was no history of medication use. Thus, we eventually diagnosed the patient, on the basis of both the Paris
criteria and Japanese guidelines [4, 8], with an autoimmune liver disease with overlapping features of PBC and AIH. Pathological findings
from liver biopsies revealed interface hepatitis with dense portal and periportal lymphocytic/lymphoplasmacytic infiltrations (Fig. 2). We
immediately treated the patient with a combination of 600 mg/day UDCA and 30 mg/day PSL in accordance with the Japanese guidelines, which
resulted in improvements of both clinical and biochemical findings within 1 month. Since then, liver function has remained normal, the
current BMD is 0.508 g/cm2 greater than the normal range (0.416–0.488 g/cm2) and PSL has been slowly reduced to 7.5 mg (Fig. 3).Fig. 2Liver
histology for case 2 (daughter). a Liver biopsy showing severe chronic hepatitis with marked interface hepatitis (×2). b Magnified view of
the liver biopsy showing dense lymphocytic/lymphoplasmacytic infiltrations in portal tracts and severe piecemeal necrosis (arrow, ×5). c
Liver biopsy showing the absence of bile duct lesions, indicative of chronic nonsuppurative cholangitis and periductal granuloma (×20). d
Severe intralobular necrosis and degeneration of hepatocytes (arrowhead, ×20)Fig. 3Clinical course of case 2 (daughter). Liver biopsy was
performed on the day of admission. Following diagnosis with an autoimmune liver disease with overlapping features of primary biliary
cholangitis and autoimmune hepatitis, the patient was treated with a combination of 600 mg/day ursodeoxycholic acid (UDCA) and 30 mg/day
prednisolone (PSL) in accordance with the Japanese guidelines, resulting in an improvement of both clinical and biochemical findings within
1 month. Liver function has remained normal ever since, despite the subsequent tapering of PSL. Key: ANA antinuclear antibody, AMA anti-
mitochondrial antibody, AMA-M2 anti-mitochondrial antibody-M2 Liver histology for case 2 (daughter). a Liver biopsy showing severe chronic
hepatitis with marked interface hepatitis (×2). b Magnified view of the liver biopsy showing dense lymphocytic/lymphoplasmacytic
infiltrations in portal tracts and severe piecemeal necrosis (arrow, ×5). c Liver biopsy showing the absence of bile duct lesions,
indicative of chronic nonsuppurative cholangitis and periductal granuloma (×20). d Severe intralobular necrosis and degeneration of
hepatocytes (arrowhead, ×20) Clinical course of case 2 (daughter). Liver biopsy was performed on the day of admission. Following diagnosis
with an autoimmune liver disease with overlapping features of primary biliary cholangitis and autoimmune hepatitis, the patient was treated
with a combination of 600 mg/day ursodeoxycholic acid (UDCA) and 30 mg/day prednisolone (PSL) in accordance with the Japanese guidelines,
resulting in an improvement of both clinical and biochemical findings within 1 month. Liver function has remained normal ever since, despite
the subsequent tapering of PSL. Key: ANA antinuclear antibody, AMA anti-mitochondrial antibody, AMA-M2 anti-mitochondrial antibody-M2
Familial studies (Table 1): the mother (case 1) has two children: the first daughter (case 2) and a second daughter. We tested liver
function, autoantibodies, and HLA haplotype in all family members and subsequently compared their clinical backgrounds. The second daughter
was healthy and had no history of liver dysfunction. Laboratory findings for the second daughter revealed normal liver function, a negative
ANA, and a positive AMA-M2 antibody. The first daughter (case 2) had exactly the same HLA haplotype as the mother (case 1), whereas the
second daughter’s HLA haplotype was DRB1*04:05/DRB1*01:01. There was no difference between any of the family members with respect to
medication use, smoking status, alcohol consumption, or obstetric history. The period of time living with the mother for the first daughter
(case 2) was same as that for the second daughter. The mother (case 1) was a housewife, which differed from both daughters’ occupations as
nurses. There were no histories of symptoms suggestive of viral infection. We encountered two patients exhibiting overlapping clinical
features of PBC and AIH in a family with a similar genetic background in terms of HLA-DRB1 haplotype. Autoimmune liver disease exhibiting
features of both PBC and AIH may be present at diagnosis or develop during follow-up. At diagnosis, our cases already fell into two
diagnostic criteria: the Paris criteria and Japanese guidelines [4, 8]. In Japan, most patients with overlapping features of PBC and AIH
have been reported to evolve into either PBC or AIH . The development of AIH following liver transplantation for PBC has also been reported
. We suggest that our present cases provide further evidence of a link between these two diseases. Thus, autoimmune liver disease with
overlapping features of PBC and AIH, the so-called “PBC–AIH overlap syndrome,” should no longer be considered as distinct diagnostic
entities. However, PBC–AIH overlap syndrome has been reported to progress rapidly to cirrhosis and liver failure . In our present cases, the
revised AIH scoring system implied a probable AIH. On the other hand, based on the simplified IAIHG scoring system, a probable AIH was
implied for case 1, and a definite AIH for case 2. The simplified IAIHG scoring system is thought to be more effective in diagnostic
specificity than the revised AIH scoring system . The relevant scoring system should therefore be selected depending on the situation and
when considering the possibility of rapid progression when features of PBC and AIH overlap. In the Japanese guidelines, it is recommended
that physicians treat PBC–AIH overlap syndrome with PSL in combination with UDCA when PBC patients have also been described to develop a
probable or definite AIH based on the simplified IAIHG scoring system [4, 6, 12]. In addition, our cases were diagnosed as definite AIH
using the revised AIH score, which has previously been considered to exclude a diagnosis of probable AIH for other liver disorders .
Although PBC–AIH overlap syndrome may not be considered as a distinct diagnostic entity, the therapeutic strategy indicated by the Japanese
guidelines is considered to be a realistic and useful clinical policy to treat patients with overlapping features of PBC and AIH in a swift
and effective manner, even if they occur within the same family, as observed in our current cases. Although our cases responded to PSL
therapy, it is necessary to be careful when patients exhibit a high ALP level, negative for ASMA and positive for gp210. This is because
these indications represent the possible risk that patients will be nonresponsive to PSL therapy, as reported previously . Furthermore, the
long-term use of PSL can cause adverse effects, including hyperglycemia, osteoporosis, cataracts, weight gain, and an increased risk of
opportunistic infections. When treating patients presenting with overlapping features of PBC and AIH, physicians should be wary about such
complications during follow-up. Fortunately, no adverse effects arose in either of our two patients as a result of the long-term use of PSL,
although we will have to be careful with regard to the possibility of such complications arising over time. The current BMD levels in our
two cases have remained higher than the normal range without alendronate treatment. However, the administration of alendronate may be
necessary while monitoring BMD, as a previous study reported that alendronate led to the improvement of BMD in patients with PBC-related
bone loss . It has also been suggested that genetic susceptibility is an important factor in influencing the course of autoimmune liver
disease and that HLA type is the most susceptible genetic factor responsible [1, 3]. Although PBC–AIH overlap syndrome in white individuals
has been reported to be associated with positive tests for HLA-B8, DR3, or DR4, which are characterized as HLA haplotypes for AIH , both of
our familial occurrence cases shared the same HLA haplotype, DRB1*04:05/DRB1*15:02. The second daughter’s HLA haplotype, however, was
DRB1*04:05/DRB1*01:01. It is interesting to note that DRB1*04:05 was the same within all family members, whereas the DRB1*01:01 haplotype of
the second daughter differed from the DRB1*15:02 haplotype exhibited by both case 1 and case 2. While it is well known that the frequency of
the HLA-DRB1*04:05 haplotype is higher in Japanese AIH patients, it is difficult to accept that the HLA-DRB1*04:05 haplotype is associated
with the susceptibility to develop overlapping features of PBC and AIH within the same family. This is because the second daughter, with a
HLA-DRB1*04:05 haplotype, has not developed overlapping features of PBC and AIH in spite of a positive test for the AMA-M2 antibody.
Furthermore, overlapping features of PBC and AIH within the same family are very rare in proportion to the high frequency of HLA-DRB1*04:05
in Japanese AIH patients. On the other hand, the association of DRB1*15:02, which differed from the second daughter’s HLA haplotype, with
autoimmune liver disease, including the overlapping features of PBC and AIH within the same family, remains unknown, although DR15 has been
reported to be associated with other autoimmune diseases such as systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) [4, 15]. Earlier works have shown that
SLE is associated with both AIH and PBC [16, 17]. Considering these conditions, it follows that the HLA-DRB1*15:02 haplotype may affect the
susceptibility to develop overlapping features of PBC and AIH within the same family. None of our present family members had taken any
medications to prevent such problems. Moreover, there are no means of predicting the onset of PBC and AIH overlap with respect to alcohol
intake, smoking status, occupation, obstetric history, or viral serology. Although environmental conditions, the use of medications, and a
variety of infectious factors were not considered to have influenced the onset of disease in either of our two patients, the possibility of
their influences cannot be completely ruled out. As observed in our two patients, the exact mechanism underlying the onset of PBC and AIH
overlap within the same family remains unclear. Therefore, it is very important to monitor the healthy second daughter closely as she was
positive for the AMA-M2 antibody, as this might yield further knowledge with regard to what factors influence the onset of PBC and AIH
overlap within the same family. In case 2, pathological findings were compatible with AIH, in that there were no pathological findings of
PBC, such as chronic nonsuppurative destructive cholangitis. Therefore, it was considered that AIH might represent a predominant
pathophysiological factor in patients with overlapping features of PBC and AIH occurring within the same family, as observed in our cases.
PBC patients with a genetic susceptibility to AIH may occasionally develop a mixed clinical picture of PBC and AIH. Existing reports also
highlight that a genetic predisposition exists for both PBC and AIH, which share a common pathogenic mechanism . The present cases suggest
that a genetic predisposition is responsible for autoimmune liver disease with overlapping clinical features of PBC and AIH within the same
family. It has also been reported that AIH develops among PBC patients after 6 months to 13 years . As observed in our familial cases, the
speed of sequential presentation of overlapping PBC and AIH features is very rapid. Consequently, autoimmune liver disease with clinical
features of both PBC and AIH occurring within the same family should be treated very carefully by a combination of PSL and UDCA immediately,
especially considering the possibility of rapid progression to liver cirrhosis and failure. The authors are grateful to Dr. Taro Takami,
Institute for Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Yamaguchi University Graduate School of Medicine, Japan, for his support in
revising this manuscript. The authors declare that they have no conflict of interest. All procedures followed have been performed in
accordance with the ethical standards laid down in the 1964 Declaration of Helsinki and its later amendments. Informed consent was obtained
from all patients for being included in the study.
