A 49-year-old female presented to our department with right infra-auricular swelling present for more than 3 weeks. The patient’s medical
history was not remarkable. The patient had no fever, cough, stridor, dyspnea, shortness of breath, rash, and dryness of mouth or eyes,
weight loss, convulsions, or previous hospital admissions. The family history was unremarkable. Physical examination revealed a solitary,
firm, non-tender, mobile, and approximately 2-cm sized mass of the right parotid gland. The overlying skin was normal in appearance without
erythema or induration. The patient had no cranial nerve deficits and no cervical lymphadenopathy. Computed tomography (CT) scan of the neck
demonstrated about 2.2 × 2.1 × 2.2 cm heterogeneously enhancing mass in the right parotid gland (Fig. 1A). Fine-needle aspiration cytology
(FNAC) under ultrasound showed chronic granulomatous inflammation. Based on these observations, the preoperative diagnosis was a right-side
parotid tumor. We performed the superficial parotidectomy with preserving facial nerve through a standard ‘lazy S’ cervico-mastoid
preauricular surgical incision. The post-operative course was uneventful. The histopathological analysis of the parotid mass demonstrated
non-necrotizing granulomatous inflammation suggestive of sarcoidosis (Fig. 1B). Staining of the excised tissues was negative for acid-fast
bacilli, and special stains for mycobacteria and fungus revealed no microorganisms. We consulted a pulmonologist and ophthalmologist.
Ophthalmologic examinations and radiologic examinations (chest and abdomen CT) revealed no evidence of lung sarcoidosis. The final diagnosis
made was parotid gland sarcoidosis. The patient has been regularly followed up usually every 6 months with ophthalmologic and radiologic
examinations to check for occurrence of sarcoidosis. The authors obtained approval from the institutional review board of Chonnam National
University Hwasun Hospital (CNUHH-2016-005). DISCLOSURE: The authors have no potential conflicts of interest to disclose. AUTHOR
CONTRIBUTION: Study concept and design: Lee DH. Data collection and analysis: Kim JH. Drafting of manuscript and critical revision: Lee DH,
Lee JK. Revision: Kim JH. Approval of final version of manuscript: all authors. Supportive findings for diagnosis of the patient. (A) Neck
CT scans demonstrate a 2.2 × 2.1 × 2.2 cm heterogeneously enhancing mass (arrow) in the right parotid gland. (B) Histological examination of
the specimen reveals non-necrotizing coalescing granulomas, composed of epithelioid cells and scattered multinucleated giant cells (arrow).
The multinucleated giant cells are of Langhans type. Mature lymphoplasma cells form a concentric rim around the granuloma. Granulomatous
inflammation irregularly infiltrates normal salivary parenchyma and peri-parotid soft tissue (Hematoxylin and eosin stained, × 100).
