Toxoplasmosis may be transferred by organ transplantation. The most common clinical presentation is with multisystem disease, although
isolated ocular toxoplasmosis has been described. Many centers have suggested that universal use of co‐trimoxazole prophylaxis obviates the
need for specific Toxoplasma testing. We report a case of donor‐acquired ocular toxoplasmosis after liver transplantation despite
co‐trimoxazole prophylaxis. The diagnosis was confirmed by Toxoplasma polymerase chain reaction assay in conjunction with seroconversion.
The fact that the infection was donor acquired was confirmed by serological mismatch and the absence of sporozoite‐specific antigen antibody
in the recipient. G.J. Webb , H. Shah , M.D. David , S. Tiew , N. Beare , G.M. Hirschfield . Post‐prophylaxis Toxoplasma chorioretinitis
following donor–recipient mismatched liver transplantation. Transpl Infect Dis 2016: 18: 805–808. All rights reserved27500398 Ocular
toxoplasmosis is a major cause of uveitis worldwide and may be particularly aggressive in the immunosuppressed 1. Transfer of the causative
agent Toxoplasma gondii through transplantation has been reported for all solid organs, although infection most commonly presents with
multisystem disease 2. Incidences vary between transplant programs, and it has been suggested that universal prophylaxis with co‐trimoxazole
(TMP/SMX) is sufficient to obviate the need for Toxoplasma testing 3. Here, we report a case of donor‐acquired isolated ocular toxoplasmosis
despite TMP/SMX prophylaxis, occurring 7 months after liver transplantation. A previously healthy 32‐year‐old British female patient
presented with fulminant liver failure due to seronegative hepatitis. She received super‐urgent orthotopic liver transplantation from a
brainstem dead UK donor. The recipient was seronegative for cytomegalovirus (CMV), but the donor was positive. The post‐transplant course
was complicated by 2 episodes of acute rejection requiring high‐dose corticosteroids, in addition to standard immunosuppression with
tacrolimus and mycophenolate. At discharge, liver biochemistry was normal. As per unit policy, she received 3 months of TMP/SMX and
valganciclovir prophylaxis to prevent Pneumocystis jirovecii pneumonia and CMV infection, respectively. Seven months after transplantation,
painless blurred vision affecting the left eye developed over several days. The patient had been well in the intervening period, with no
other symptoms, and she was afebrile. External ocular examination was unremarkable. Fundoscopy of the left eye revealed 2 foci of
chorioretinitis: an active nasal lesion and a temporal lesion that had largely progressed to chorioretinal atrophy. An overlying vitreous
hazing was consistent with mild vitritis (Fig. 1). Wide‐field photograph of patient's left fundus, with eyelash artifacts inferiorly. Nasal
region (left of the printed image) contains an active focus of chorioretinitis; the temporal region contains a region of chorioretinitis
that has progressed to atrophy. Mild hazing caused by vitritis. As the differential diagnosis included Toxoplasma or CMV chorioretinitis,
empirical therapy with ganciclovir and clindamycin was commenced initially. An aqueous humor sample revealed the presence of leukocytes, but
routine microbiological cultures and polymerase chain reaction (PCR) for CMV and varicella zoster virus were negative. Toxoplasma gondii DNA
was detected by real‐time PCR amplification of a region of the RE gene (GenBank Accession no. AF146527). Serum Toxoplasma immunoglobulin
(Ig)M was positive and IgG negative; IgG became weakly positive 20 days later. Retrospective testing of stored pre‐transplant recipient
serum showed absence of anti‐Toxoplasma IgG and IgM, whereas donor serology was Toxoplasma IgG positive. Ganciclovir was discontinued, the
patient completed a course of clindamycin, and her vision normalized over several weeks. Subsequently, testing for a sporozoite‐specific
antibody, according to the method described by Hill et al. 4, was negative (anti‐TgERP O.D. 0.198; positive cutoff >0.4). Long‐term TMP/SMX
secondary prophylaxis was commenced to prevent future recurrences, although was subsequently withdrawn because of myelosuppression. The
patient went on to have a successful pregnancy while taking only tacrolimus and prednisolone immunosuppression. On review of possible risk
factors for acquiring toxoplasmosis, it was established that the patient had been given and followed routine advice to wash vegetables and
to cook meat thoroughly. She had contact with her mother's healthy adult cat, but did not provide care for it. This is the first reported
case, to our knowledge, of Toxoplasma chorioretinitis occurring after liver transplantation despite TMP/SMX prophylaxis. Donor–recipient
Toxoplasma serological mismatch (seropositive donor to seronegative recipients; D+R−), the onset of symptoms occurring 4 months after
discontinuing prophylaxis, the absence of sporozoite‐specific antibody, and the lack of other obvious routes of acquisition suggest that our
case could represent donor‐acquired infection. Of particular interest in suggesting the route of acquisition is the negative
sporozoite‐specific antibody. In contrast, in a large US series of congenital toxoplasmosis, positive results of this assay suggested that
the majority of such cases represent oocyst ingestion, even in the absence of risk behaviors 5. Toxoplasma donor–recipient mismatch was a
significant risk factor for post solid organ transplant toxoplasmosis across multiple solid organ types in a case–control series 6. The rate
of infection appeared to be highest with heart transplantation, and this has been attributed to the Toxoplasma bradyzoite cysts'
predilection for muscle tissue including myocardium 7. Furthermore, reports of separate recipients developing toxoplasmosis from kidney
grafts from the same donor suggest that transferred infection can occur 6, 8. The incidence of new Toxoplasma infection in the UK population
is 0.25–0.5% per year, while toxoplasmosis of any presentation in donor–recipient mismatch has been reported at up to 40% across all solid
organs 6, 9. Given that the cat in this case was adult and healthy, that living with fewer than 3 kittens is not a significant risk factor
for acquisition of Toxoplasma, that other family members remained well, and that serum sporozoite‐specific antibody was negative, we believe
feline contact to be an unlikely route of infection in this case 10. A November 2015 Medline/PubMed search for “toxoplasmosis” and
“transplantation” returned 506 abstracts, with 3 previous cases of possible donor‐derived ocular toxoplasmosis following orthotopic liver
transplantation 11, 12, 13, 14. None received prophylaxis (Table 1). Our patient presented 7 months after transplantation and 4 months after
cessation of prophylaxis. This is in contrast to a median of 31 days after transplantation for a series of all presentations of
toxoplasmosis in liver transplant recipients 6 and 86.5 days among all solid organ transplants 12; however, details of prophylaxis are
incomplete in the former study. The reported onset of isolated Toxoplasma chorioretinitis ranges from 21 days 11 to 9 months 6, and
toxoplasmosis among all solid organ transplants is reported to be delayed in its presentation by prophylaxis (476.28 ± 415.70 days with
prophylaxis vs. 48.81 ± 28.93 without), with no patients presenting while on prophylaxis 15. We hypothesize that our case's presentation may
have been altered by prophylaxis and/or corticosteroids given for rejection. Reported cases of Toxoplasma chorioretinitis after liver
transplantation AZA, azathioprine; CsA, cyclosporine; Pred, prednis(ol)one; IgM, immunoglobulin M; Pyri, pyrimethamine; Sulfad,
sulfadiazine; Fol, folinic acid; IgG, immunoglobulin G; CMV, cytomegalovirus; Tac, tacrolimus; MMF, mycophenolate mofetil; PCR, polymerase
chain reaction assay; TMP/SMX, trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole; Clind, clindamycin. In this case, chorioretinitis was multifocal and vitritis
was mild. These findings are consistent with those seen in human immunodeficiency virus/acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (HIV/AIDS) ocular
toxoplasmosis patients 16. This presentation is in contrast to the immunocompetent host, where chorioretinitis is usually unifocal, may be
accompanied by scars from previous resolved episodes, and may have severe overlying vitritis. Laboratory diagnosis of toxoplasmosis
traditionally relies on the presence of IgM antibodies or on IgG seroconversion. However, in immunocompromised patients, seroconversion may
be delayed and even absent. The specificity and sensitivity of PCR is, therefore, particularly useful 3. Primary prophylaxis for the
prevention of toxoplasmosis is used by many heart transplant centers. Some advocate indefinite prophylaxis in donor–recipient mismatch. For
other solid organ transplant programs, especially in the presence of a low background rate of Toxoplasma IgG seropositivity in the
population, and where TMP/SMX Pneumocystis jirovecii prophylaxis is routine, donors and recipients are not routinely tested for the presence
of evidence of past Toxoplasma infection 15. Little experience has been published on the need for secondary prophylaxis after completing a
treatment course for a confirmed Toxoplasma infection in the context of immunosuppression outside the HIV/AIDS population 17. Further
studies are warranted given the side effect profile and costs associated with agents such as TMP/SMX; regular monitoring by blood PCR may be
an alternative strategy. In summary, we present a case of toxoplasmosis chorioretinitis in a liver transplant recipient. This is the first
such case, to our knowledge, reported after prophylaxis, and we believe that it is likely to represent graft transmission. The onset months
after transplantation, the relative rarity of the condition, and its atypical presentation may delay diagnosis in similar cases. We note the
utility of parallel donor–recipient serology and of PCR analysis of aqueous fluid. Toxoplasma infection is still a potential risk for the
liver transplant population despite widespread use of TMP/SMX prophylaxis. The authors thank Dr Dolores Hill of the United States Department
of Agriculture's Agricultural Research Service for her assistance with the sporozoite‐specific antibody assay and Prof Edward Guy of the
Toxoplasma Reference Laboratory, Swansea, for advice and for processing the Toxoplasma PCR assay. Funding: G.J.W. is the recipient of a UK
Medical Research Council Clinical Research Training Fellowship. G.J.W. and G.M.H. are supported by the National Institute for Health
Research. Disclaimer: This report presents independent research supported by the National Institute for Health Research (NIHR). The views
expressed are those of the authors(s) and not necessarily those of the NHS, the NIHR, or the Department of Health. Conflicts of interest:
None declared.
