A 13-year-old child was clinically diagnosed with mucopolysaccharidosis type VI—Maroteaux–Lamy syndrome (MPS VI) at the age of 5 years, and
the diagnosis was confirmed biochemically and genetically (homozygous mutation in ARSB gene). At that time, his older brother manifested
with increasing severe mental retardation. His urinary glycosaminoglycan excretion in urine was elevated, but there was only 1 mutation in
the ARSB gene defining him as a healthy carrier of MPS VI. The 15-year-old boy was born with dysmorphic facial features, cleft lip and
palate, and multiple contractures associated with profound skeletal deformities manifested, severe mental retardation, and seizures, leading
to the diagnosis of cerebral palsy from birth on. Clinical and radiographic phenotypic characterization was the baseline tool to document
the older sibling, parents, and relatives, all of them examined at the Orthopaedic Hospital of Speising, Vienna, Austria. The family history
(from maternal and paternal sides) showed >10 subjects with variable clinical histories of hyperactivity and attention deficit disorder,
depression, and a diversity of skeletal abnormalities, such as dysplastic spondylolisthesis, discovertebral degeneration, osteopenia,
osteophytosis, and progressive degeneration of the weight bearing zones (mostly developed at middle age). Eleven patients in a family with
interrelated marriages (two male siblings of 15 and 13-year-old), parents and relatives over three generations were enrolled. One of the
siblings was diagnosed with Maroteaux-Lamy syndrome at the age of five-years and mutation of the ARBS gene has been encountered. The older
sibling manifested at birth craniofacial abnormalities associated with multiple contracture and seizures. Cerebral palsy was the suggested
diagnosis. Clinical and radiographic phenotypes were the baseline tool to document the older sibling, parents and relatives at the
orthopaedic Hospital of Speising, Vienna, Austria. These were followed by whole Exome sequencing in three family subjects. A series of
genetic studies in the older sibling showed homozygous mutation in GNS gene compatible with MPS IIID. Both parents are first related and
were found to be heterozygous for N-acetylglucosamine-6-sulfatase GNS gene. Family history showed more than 10 subjects with variable
clinical presentations such as dysplastic spondylolisthesis, disco-vertebral degeneration, osteopenia, osteophytosis, and progressive
degeneration of the weight bearing zones (mostly developed at middle age). Owing to the multiple systemic involvements, a genetic cause was
suspected and a molecular genetic investigation by using whole-exome-sequencing method in 3 family subjects (trios) was performed: the
15-year-old boy and his parents. A homozygous splice-site-mutation in the GNS gene could be found, compatible with
mucopolysaccharidosis–Sanfillipo syndrome (type IIID). Both parents are first related and were now found also to be heterozygous for the GNS
gene mutation found in their older son. Therefore, both parents are heterozygous carriers for the ARSB gene mutation but also the GNS gene
mutation. In the son with MPS VI, no mutation in the GNS gene was found, but the brother with MPS IIID was heterozygous for the ARSB gene
mutation. We presume that the intrafamilial variability of clinical signs in different family members could be the result of various
mutations in the ARSB/GNS genes in the carriers or potential modulating effects of other genes or differences in genetic backgrounds.
Mucopolysaccharidoses (MPSs) are rare inherited lysosomal storage disorders caused by enzymatic defects in the catabolism of
glycosaminoglycans (GAGs). Presently, there are 11 different enzymatic defects associated with 7 different types of MPS (from I to IX). The
lack of enzymatic activity in the degradation of the different types of GAGs leads to tissue-specific intracellular accumulation of
substrates, such as heparan sulfate, dermatan sulfate, or keratan sulfate. Clinically, patients present—after an uneventful birth and a
short period of normal development—with multisystemic complications associated with organ-specific dysfunction secondary to the
intracellular substrate accumulation. Mucopolysaccharidosis type VI or Maroteaux–Lamy syndrome (Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man no.
253200) is a form of MPS with severe somatic changes, but mental retardation is rare. Onset is around 2 to 3 years with growth retardation,
large head, kyphosis, hip dysplasia, genu valgum, and pectus carinatum. Before that growth arrest, there might be a period of accelerated
growth with advanced bone age. Cloudy corneae and coarse facies develop. Radiological features resemble those of Hurler syndrome
(mucopolysaccharidosis type I). Hypoplasia of the odontoid process leading to atlanto-axial subluxation has been reported. The biochemical
defect is a deficiency of N-acetylgalactosamine-4-sulfatase (arylsulfatase B) leading to increased urinary excretion of dermatan sulfate.
The ARSB gene on chromosome 5q14.1 is responsible for this type of MPS and homozygous or compound heterozygous disease-causing mutations
have been demonstrated. The clinical spectrum varies from severe to attenuated forms, but a severe subtype with rapid deterioration and
severe deformity before the age of 10 years could be observed. MPS III or Sanfilippo syndromes comprise a group of lysosomal storage
disorder caused by an impaired degradation of heparan sulfate. Four subtypes have been defined, each caused by deficiency of a different
enzyme: heparan N-sulfatase (type A), alpha-N-acetylglucosaminidase (type B), acetyl-coenzyme A, alpha-glucosaminide acetyltransferase (type
C), and N-acetylglucosamine-6-sulfatase (type D). Compared with the other MPSs, Sanfilippo syndrome is characterized by severe central
nervous system degeneration and relatively mild somatic changes. The first symptoms usually manifest between 2 and 6 years of age, and death
typically occurs during the second or third decade of life. For the MPS IIID (Sanfilippo syndrome type III D, Online Mendelian Inheritance
in Man no. 252940), Kresse et al and Beesley et al defined the enzymatic defect in the GNS gene on chromosome 12q14.3, which encodes for the
N-acetyl-glucosamine-6-sulfatase.[ 5 6] The study protocol was approved by the Medical University of Vienna (Ethics Committee, EK Nr.
921/2009); in addition, informed consent was obtained from the family guardian. Eleven patients over 4 generations (5 females and 6 males)
of age range from 0 to 71 years were investigated. Four family subjects (the 2 siblings and parents) were examined via phenotypic
characterization, followed by investigation of urinary glycosaminoglycans and genotyping of the older boy and the parents. The rest of the
family subjects were evaluated via photographs, conventional radiographs, MRI, and CT scan. Like any other orthopedic hospital, diverse
forms of orthopedic problems were the incentive of these families to seek advice. Children, parents, and relatives with frequent hospital
admissions were given high priority for a comprehensive studies and phenotypic characterization. The latter is our baseline tool toward the
recognition of diverse forms of disabilities in correlation with serious heritable disorders (Fig. 1). Family pedigree (11 patients over 4
generations, 5 females and 6 males). The index patient (please refer to family pedigree) is now a 13-year-old boy born full term by cesarean
section (CS) owing to polyhydramnion. Via ultrasound examination at the gestational age of 14 to 15 weeks, spina bifida occulta was
recognized. At birth, his weight was 3240 g and his length was 50 cm. At the age of 10 days, urinary tract infection because of reflux was
diagnosed and he was operated at the age of 3 months. At the age of 3 years and because of his dysmorphic facial features, skeletal survey
showed dysostosis multiplex and dermatan sulfate in urine was identified. Echocardio Doppler showed mitral-valve stenosis. MPS was
identified, but the type was not confirmed and no genetic counseling was arranged for the parents. At the age of 4 years, he developed
myelopathy because of atlanto-axial instability and occipitocervical fusion was performed accordingly. At the age of 5 years, he was
introduced to a specialized metabolic center. DNA testing was performed and a homozygous stop mutation in the ARSB gene could be found (exon
5: c.979C > T; p.G327∗). These genetic findings confirmed the diagnosis of MPS VI (Maroteaux-Lamy-syndrome). When his elder brother was
diagnosed to have MPS IIID, the index patient also was re-diagnosed and showed no mutation in the GNS gene as found in his brother (Table
1). Genetic findings in the siblings and parents for the both MPS-causing genes. The older brother (subject IV, 10) was born at 35 weeks of
gestation via CS, with a birth weight of 2450 g and length 50 cm. At birth, he manifested a constellation of malformation complex of cleft
lip and cleft palate, facial dysmorphic features, hypoglycemia, hypacusis, and spastic quadriplegia with convulsions. Anticonvulsive drugs
were administered to overcome his fits. Cerebral MRI imaging showed periventricular leucomalacia as result of ischemic encephalopathy.
Cerebral palsy was the suggested diagnosis. At the age of 7 years and at the time of the diagnosis of his younger sibling (IV,11), he also
was tested for mucopolysaccaridosis. Urinary glycosaminoglycans were found to be elevated, but no investigations of the different fractions
were performed. In accordance to the diagnosis of his brother, molecular genetic testing for MPS VI—Maroteaux–Lamy syndrome by Sanger
sequencing method was performed. As he only showed 1 heterozygous mutation in the ARSB gene according to his brother, the diagnosis of MPS
VI could not be proven, and the diagnosis of spastic cerebral palsy was confirmed. At the age of 15 years (IV,10), the child was seen for
the first time at the Pediatric Department in the Orthopedic Hospital in Speising, Vienna, Austria. He was referred because of severe hip
pain. Clinical examination showed severe growth retardation and a relative large head in comparison with short stature (−4SD, OFC was +2SD),
evident craniofacial dysmorphic features, thick condensed hair, thick eyebrows, narrowing of temporal area, facial asymmetry, hypotelorism,
depressed nasal bridge and large flat nose, cleft lip/palate, long philtrum, wide mouth, thin upper lip, and large mandible associated with
multiple contractures and severe mental retardation (Fig. 2). The phenotype of the 15-year-old sibling (IV,10) showed growth deficiency
(−4SD) OFC (+2SD), large head in comparison with short stature, thick condensed hair, narrow frontal area, facial asymmetry, hypotelorism,
depressed nasal bridge and large flat nose, long philtrum, a repaired cleft lip, a thin upper lip, and large mandible. Severe mental
retardation, hearing loss, and bilateral strabismus were associated with multiple contractures. On the basis of skeletal survey, lateral
skull radiograph showed thickened sclerosed calvaria, large sella turcica, and hyperostosis of the skull base (Fig. 3). Anterior posterior
(AP) pelvis X-ray showed femoral necks in valgus position, hypoplastic iliac bodies, and collapse of the capital femoral epiphyses (Fig. 4).
Lateral spine radiograph showed anterosuperior hypoplasia and ovoid configurations of the vertebrae T10 to T12. T12 showed marked posterior
end-plate hypoplasia and L1 to L5 showed anterior end plates concavities (Fig. 5). Lateral skull radiograph subject (IV,10) showed thickened
sclerosed calvaria, large cella turcica, and hyperostosis of the skull base (arrows). Anterior posterior pelvis radiograph, subject (IV, 10)
showed femoral necks in valgus position, hypoplastic iliac bodies, and collapse of the capital femoral epiphyses (arrows) associated with
unilateral dislocation of the right hip. Lateral spine radiograph subject (IV,10) showed anterosuperior hypoplasia and ovoid configurations
of T10 to T12. T12 showed marked posterior end plate hypoplasia and L1 to L5 showed anterior end plates concavities. We extensively analyzed
the clinical and the radiographic phenotypes of the elder sibling (IV,10), which are typical signs of dysostosis multiplex observed in
lysosomal disorders. Owing to the severe mental retardation combined with many changes in organs such as skeleton with signs of dysostosis
multiplex, a genetic investigation with whole-exome-sequencing was performed. With this, a homozygous spice-site-mutation between exone 9
and intron 9 in the GNS gene was found (c.1098 + 1G > T). This confirmed a MPS IIID and therefore a second type of MPS in this family, MPS
IIID (Table 1). Examination of the parents (subjects III, 6 and 7) showed both manifesting with short stature (-2SD) and mild coarse facies,
but with normal intelligence. Both had a history of severe back pain since young adulthood. Lateral lumbar spine radiograph of the mother
showed a bilateral break in the pars interarticularis (lucency shown by arrow head). The latter was the reason to develop forward slippage
of L5 on the S1 (Fig. 6). AP pelvis radiograph showed osteoarthritis and an increased level of calcification in favor of facet joint
arthritis. Lateral spine radiograph of the father (subject III, 7) showed grade 2 SL-vertebral body above subtends 1/2 of the AP diameter of
the vertebral body below (Fig. 7). Lateral spine radiograph of the mother (III,6) showed a bilateral break in the pars interarticularis
(lucency shown by arrow head). The latter was the reason to develop forward slippage of L5 on the S1; she is a heterozygous carrier of
disease causing mutations in the ARSB gene as well as in the GNS gene, which denote an impaired lysosomal degradation of dermatan sulfate
and heparan sulfate in the fully developed diseases MPS VI and MPS IIID. Lateral spine radiograph of the father (III,7) showed notching of
the anterior end plates of the lumbar vertebrae associated with grade 2 - spondylolisthesis (forward slippage of L5/S1) because of
congenital abnormality of the facets and the pars-interarticularis (arrow). Also the father is a heterozygous carrier of disease-causing
mutations in the ARSB gene as well as in the GNS gene, which denotes an impaired lysosomal degradation of dermatan sulfate and heparan
sulfate in the fully developed diseases MPS VI and MPS IIID. Both parents showed a normal urinary GAG excretion, and there was no abnormal
heparan sulfate or dermatan sulfate fraction seen. After years when carrier status for the ARSB gene was identified because of the diagnosis
in the first son, both parents now were found also to be heterozygous for the GNS mutation of their second son (Table 2). Various skeletal
and extraskeletal abnormalities in different family subjects. The MPSs constitute the largest group of lysosomal storage diseases. The
intracellular degradation of complex sugar-containing compounds by lysosomal enzymes is abnormal in this group of diseases, leading to
intracellular accumulation of only partly degraded substrates. The MPSs are subdivided based on their enzyme deficiency and the type of
substance that accumulates. The GAGs heparan sulfate, dermatan sulfate, and keratan sulfate are the mucopolysaccharides that accumulate and
are excreted by the urine. Biochemical analysis of the different fractions in urine can lead to the diagnosis of the specific MPS. Many
techniques have been applied to isolate the GAG from the urine. The results of abnormal GAGs vary with the different types of MPS. The
excretion typically elevated in MPS VI is dermatan sulfate, and in MPS IIID is heparan sulfate. All types of MPSs show skeletal changes
known as dysostosis multiplex and lead to an abnormal short stature. The skull is enlarged, with a thick calvarium, the ribs are oar-shaped
and broader anteriorly than posteriorly. The vertebral bodies are hypoplastic and anterosuperior with ovoid configurations. Gibbus,
scoliosis, and kyphosis are frequent findings, the iliac wings are flared, and the acetabulae are dysplastic. Coxa valga is common.[ 1 7]
Maroteaux-Lamy syndrome (MPS VI) is caused by a deficiency of N-acetylgalactosamine-4-sulfatase (arylsulfatase B) leading to increased
excretion of dermatan sulfate. The ARSB gene has been isolated and mutations demonstrated. There is abnormal accumulation of the GAG
dermatan sulfate. The disease usually manifests at 2 to 3 years of age, when shortness of the trunk and limbs, genu valgum, lumbar kyphosis,
and pectus carinatum become apparent. Thorne et al (2001) found that canal stenosis in MPS VI at the level of foramen magnum is more common
complication. The biochemical defect is a deficiency of N-acetylgalactosamine-4-sulfatase (arylsulfatase B) leading to increased excretion
of dermatan sulfate. The gene has been isolated and mutations demonstrated. About 10% of the world's MPSVI-population (105 patients) were
molecular genetically tested by Karageorgos et al, and mutations were found in 83 patients. Enzyme replacement therapy using recombinant
arylsulfatase B has been shown to improve ambulatory ability and joint pain and stiffness, although positive effects on pulmonary and
cardial functions are observed. GAG excretion in the urine was decreased by 76%. Sanfilippo syndrome (MPS III) is a group of 4 autosomal
recessive enzyme deficiencies, all leading to an inability to metabolize heparan sulfate. MPS IIIA is caused by a defect in the lysosomal
enzyme sulfamidase (Blanch et al, 1997). MPS IIIB is caused by a deficiency of alpha-N-acetylglucosaminidase.[ 10 11] MPS IIIC results from
a deficiency of acetyl-coenzyme A: alpha-glucosaminide-N-acetyltransferase. MPS IIID is caused by a deficiency of
N-acetylglucosamine-6-sulfatase. Mutations in the GNS gene result in the lysosomal storage disorder MPS IIID. For all phenotypes, MPS III is
a progressive disease with 3 phases that begin after a period of apparently normal development. Sleep problems and disturbances are almost
universal associated with extremely irregular sleep pattern on polygraphic recordings.[ 13 14] In the first phase, generally starting
between the ages of 1 and 3 years, a slowing or plateauing of cognitive development becomes apparent; often speech is more noticeably
affected than other cognitive functions. The second phase starts at approximately 3 to 4 years of age and is characterized by progressive
cognitive deterioration and the emergence of behavioral difficulties and sleep disturbances. Behavioral difficulties, including
hyperactivity, impulsivity, obstinacy, anxious behaviors, and autistic-like behaviors, worsen over time and can become extreme. The third
stage begins, usually in the teenage years, with the onset of severe dementia and motor function decline. Behavioral problems slowly
disappear as patients lose locomotion. Swallowing difficulties and spasticity emerge. Patients eventually regress to a fully bedridden and
in a vegetative state; they usually die at the end of the second or beginning of the third decade of life. Mild cognitive impairment may
remain stable into the teenage years or even adulthood before progressing. Behavior problems, similar to those seen in severe patients, do
emerge in attenuated patients, but may emerge later or be more manageable in degree. The third stage and death usually occur in the fourth
to sixth decade of life, with cases of survival being reported at nearly 70 years of age. Patients with attenuated disease may easily remain
undiagnosed until adulthood, as early diagnosis in this population is particularly challenging. In 1 study of all MPS IIIB patients ever
diagnosed in the Netherlands, 33 of 52 patients displayed an attenuated phenotype. In MPS III, hyperactivity may be marked, with extreme
restless behavior, temper tantrums, and crying or laughing fits. Impulsivity may be such that patients may have little to no regard for
their own safety. Parents may report the need for constant supervision. One characteristic feature of the behavior is that it does not
respond or responds poorly to standard stimulant medications and does not respond to behavior-based interventions. Extreme difficulty in
falling asleep and frequent night waking further complicates behavioral problems. Wijburg et al described the difficulties for the
clinicians to distinguish MPSIII behavioral problems from ADHD or autism spectrum disorders. Sun et al described a combined Hurler and
Sanfilippo syndrome in a sibling pair. They discussed the clinical features and the course of the disease. Neither the radiographic
phenotypes of the sibling pair nor details for the parents or other family subjects were included. The whole clinical and the radiographic
phenotype in our current patient (subject, IV, 10) is not akin to any of the above-mentioned studies. Noteworthy clinical and skeletal
abnormalities encountered in our current patient are distinctive: the early life multiple contractures, cleft lip and palate, and the severe
axial and appendicular skeletal abnormalities. The constellation of the clinical malformations and the constellation of the skeletal
abnormalities were not compatible with any previous patients with MPS IIID. The family subjects (III, 5 and 8 in Table 2) both manifested a
history of ADHD and endogenous depression, associated with vertebral and weight-bearing joint degeneration. The constellation of the
clinical and mild radiographic abnormalities might be a link to a type of MPS. Physicians/geneticists should be aware of missing an
unsuspected long-term disorder. Diagnosis should not be established unless adequate knowledge of the etiological understanding is available.
Every clinical/ radiographic feature should be potentially analyzed in connection with the patients’ conditions. This article discusses the
basic clinical/radiographic and the genetic phenotypes and the interfamiliar variability of MPS. Neither the constellation of Maroteaux-Lamy
syndrome and Sanfilippo D syndrome in a pair of siblings nor the interfamilial involvements have been described in the literature. The
parents were not only genetic carriers for MPS IIID, but also for MPS VI. Moreover, they manifested somatic involvement of the vertebral
column since their early lives. Similarly, the clinical and the radiographic phenotypes in other family subjects raise the possibility of
being genetic carriers for 2 MPS types. We wish to stress on, that Sanfilippo syndrome is characterized by severe CNS degeneration and
relatively mild somatic disease. In our current patient (patient 2), there were novel findings such as cleft lip and palate and severe
dysostosis multiplex. However, the genetic confirmation in >1 MPS gene involved in a pair of siblings adds to the obscure nature of the
disease. We wish to thank Professor Michael Freilinger and Professor Reginald Bittner for their efforts in delineating the genetic error in
patient 2 and his parents. Abbreviations: ARSB gene = arylsulfatase B gene, GNS gene = N-acetylglucosamine-6-sulfatase gene, GAGs =
glycosaminoglycans, MPS = mucopolysaccharidoses. Given that all investigations and interventions described in this report were performed as
part of the regular health care whose informed consent was obtained on admission, an ethical approval was obtained as well. Authors
contributions: AAK, SGK, JH, GW, FG, and RG contributed in writing the MS, analysis of data, and all approved the final version. All urinary
investigations were done by SGK. The authors report no conflicts of interest.
