Solid pseudopapillary neoplasms (SPNs) of the pancreas are uncommon neoplasms and are potentially malignant. Complete resection is advised
due to rare recurrence and metastasis. Duodenum-preserving pancreatic head resection (DPPHR) is indicated for SPNs located in the pancreatic
head and is only performed using the open approach. To the best of our knowledge, there are no reports describing laparoscopic DPPHR
(LDPPHR) for SPNs. Herein, we report a case of 41-year-old female presented with a 1-week history of epigastric abdominal discomfort, and
founded an SPN of the pancreatic head by abdominal computed tomography/magnetic resonance, who was treated by radical LDPPHR without
complications, such as pancreatic fistula and bile leakage. Histological examination of the resected specimen confirmed the diagnosis of
SPN. The patient was discharged 1 week after surgery following an uneventful postoperative period. She was followed up 3 months without
readmission and local recurrence according to abdominal ultrasound. LDPPHR is a safe, feasible, and effective surgical procedure for SPNs.
In the 1970s, Beger et al developed duodenum-preserving pancreatic head resection (DPPHR) for patients with an inflammatory mass in the head
of the pancreas caused by chronic pancreatitis. Compared with pancreaticoduodenectomy, the Beger procedure maintained the integrity of the
duodenum and biliary tract. With the advantage of organ preservation, this procedure has evoked worldwide attention. Following several years
of study and practice, more and more pancreatic surgeons are now performing DPPHR to remove benign or low-grade malignant tumors in the
pancreatic head, such as solid pseudopapillary neoplasms (SPNs), and cystic neoplasms. [2 3 4] With the advances in techniques, minimally
invasive technology has become a mainstream method for abdominal diseases. Owing to the complex anatomy and rich blood supply of the
pancreas, progress has been slow in practice of laparoscopic pancreatic surgery, especially laparoscopic duodenum-preserving pancreatic head
resection (LDPPHR). Until now, there is no report describing this surgical procedure. We here report a case of 41-year-old female with an
SPN of the pancreatic head, who was treated with LDPPHR as a novel minimally invasive surgery. A 41-year-old female was admitted to our
hospital on October 9, 2015 with a 1-week history of epigastric abdominal discomfort. There were no significant findings on physical
examination. Her past medical history was unremarkable, with the exception of an allergy to penicillin. Tumor markers including carbohydrate
antigen (CA)19-9, carcinoembryonic antigen(CEA), CA72-4, and CA12-5 were all normal. Other laboratory findings such as serum levels of total
bilirubin, amylase, and immunoglobulin G (IgG)-4 were within the normal range. Abdominal contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) scan
revealed a 2.2 × 1.7 cm cystic-solid mass showing inhomogeneous enhancement in the head of the pancreas (Fig. 1A). Magnetic resonance (MR)
imaging and MR cholangiopancreatography confirmed the presence of a mass in the pancreatic head without pancreatic duct and common bile duct
(CBD) dilation (Fig. 1B, C). The distance between the tumor and Vater's ampulla was approximately 1.7 cm (Fig. 1D). CT, MRI, and MRCP scans.
(A) Contrast-enhanced CT and (B, C) contrast-enhanced MRI showed a mixed density tumor in the head of the pancreas (yellow arrow). (D) MRCP
showed the main pancreatic duct without dilation, approximately 1.7 cm between the mass (yellow arrow) and Vater's ampulla. CT = computed
tomography, MRI = magnetic resonance imaging; MRCP = magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography. After preoperative examinations, the
informed consent was signed and then LDPPHR was performed. Intraoperative frozen section further confirmed SPN, and R0 resection was
achieved. Operation time was 210 minutes, and blood loss was 150 mL. On the first postoperative day (POD1), the patient achieved out-of-bed
activity. She started a liquid diet on POD3 and was discharged on POD7. No pancreatic fistula or bile leakage was found during the hospital
stay. Histopathological and immunohistochemical examination of the resected specimen revealed that the SPN was Neuron-specific enolase
(NSE)-positive, Synaptophysin (SYN)-positive, Chromogranin A (CgA)-negative, Cluster of Differentiation (CD10)-positive, Alpha-1 antitrypsin
chymotrypsin (AACT)-positive, and Alpha-1 antitrypsin (AAT)-positive (Fig. 2A, B). Three months after operation, the patient was followed up
and no any discomfort was founded after taking solid foods. Meanwhile, laboratory examinations including blood routine examination, amylase,
and biochemical tests were normal. Abdominal ultrasound confirmed local recurrence. (A) Gross appearance of the SPN. A well-capsulated mass,
2.2 × 1.7 cm in size, was located in the pancreatic neck (white arrowhead). (B) Histopathology of the SPN (H&E × 100). The tumor showed
papillary structures with cyst-like spaces. H&E = hematoxylin & eosin, SPN = solid pseudopapillary neoplasm. The surgical procedure, a
“bottom-up” sequence, was as follows (Fig. 3): placing 5 trocars in a V-shape; dividing the gastrocolic ligament, exposing the pancreas, and
excising the anterosuperior pancreatoduodenal artery; establishing a portal vein tunnel; determining the tumor location using intraoperative
laparoscopic ultrasound; resecting the pancreatic head containing the tumor along the duodenum using a harmonic scalpel while preserving the
main arcade of the posterior pancreaticoduodenal artery; intraoperative frozen section confirmed an SPN with a negative margin; and closing
the proximal end of the main pancreatic duct (MPD), and performing an end-to-side pancreaticojejunostomy (duct-to-mucosa). Photograghs of
the laparoscopic duodenum-preserving pancreatic head resection (LDPPHR) procedure: (A) exposing the gastroduodenal artery (GDA) and excising
the anterior superior pancreatoduodenal artery (ASPD); (B) status after complete resection of the pancreatic head; (C) exposure of the main
pancreatic duct (MPD); and (D) reconstruction. The pancreaticojejunostomy was between the neck of the pancreas and the jejunal loop (duct-
to-mucosa, blue arrow). SPN is a rare pancreatic tumor, without obvious symptoms, that usually affects young females, and accounts for
approximately 1% to 2% of all exocrine pancreatic neoplasms.[ 6 7] In 2010, SPN was classified as a low-grade malignant neoplasm with an
excellent prognosis by the WHO. Therefore, complete en-bloc resection is recommended in the absence of distant metastasis. However, there is
controversy regarding the available surgical treatments for SPNs in the pancreatic head, which include DPPHR, pylorus-preserving
pancreaticoduodenectomy, and pancreaticoduodenectomy. In our case, we performed LDPPHR for SPN of the pancreatic head. The following 3
factors were taken into consideration in our choice of surgery.The location, size, and nature of the pancreatic tumor are crucial in making
this decision. Preoperative imaging is useful for diagnosing SPN, although the diagnostic accuracy for SPN is only 82%. According to the
abdominal CT and MRI findings in our case, we identified a typical SPN located in the pancreatic head, 3 × 3 cm in size, which was an
encapsulated round mass containing solid, necrotic, and hemorrhagic components. Furthermore, as previously mentioned, the distance between
the tumor and Vater's ampulla was >1 cm. No distant metastasis or local lymph node involvement were detected. Therefore, LDPPHR was
performed in accordance with current studies which suggested that DPPHR is indicated for SPNs in the pancreatic head and prophylactic lymph
node dissection is not warranted. Intraoperative ultrasound and frozen section further confirmed the diagnosis and ascertained the resection
margins.DPPHR is a less traumatic organ-preserving surgical procedure. A meta-analysis by Sukharamwala proved the superiority of DPPHR
compared with pancreaticoduodenectomy for benign or low-malignant tumors with regard to lower postoperative morbidity. With the development
of laparoscopic pancreatic surgery, the minimally invasive method of LDPPHR was introduced. LDPPHR represents the precision of minimally
invasive surgery. This technique results in not only organ preservation, but also rapid postoperative recovery. Our patient developed no
pancreatic fistula according to the International Study Group of Pancreatic Fistula, and no other complications such as bile leakage or
duodenal ischemia.LDPPHR is technically feasible at our center. It is known that laparoscopic surgery of the pancreas has developed slowly,
mainly due to the complex anatomy, rich blood supply, and critical surgical skills. Between March 2013 and June 2015, we successfully
performed laparoscopic pancreatoduodenectomy in 120 cases using the 5-hole approach. Although there are no published reports on LDPPHR, we
have completed this complex surgery based on our experience. The location, size, and nature of the pancreatic tumor are crucial in making
this decision. Preoperative imaging is useful for diagnosing SPN, although the diagnostic accuracy for SPN is only 82%. According to the
abdominal CT and MRI findings in our case, we identified a typical SPN located in the pancreatic head, 3 × 3 cm in size, which was an
encapsulated round mass containing solid, necrotic, and hemorrhagic components. Furthermore, as previously mentioned, the distance between
the tumor and Vater's ampulla was >1 cm. No distant metastasis or local lymph node involvement were detected. Therefore, LDPPHR was
performed in accordance with current studies which suggested that DPPHR is indicated for SPNs in the pancreatic head and prophylactic lymph
node dissection is not warranted. Intraoperative ultrasound and frozen section further confirmed the diagnosis and ascertained the resection
margins. DPPHR is a less traumatic organ-preserving surgical procedure. A meta-analysis by Sukharamwala proved the superiority of DPPHR
compared with pancreaticoduodenectomy for benign or low-malignant tumors with regard to lower postoperative morbidity. With the development
of laparoscopic pancreatic surgery, the minimally invasive method of LDPPHR was introduced. LDPPHR represents the precision of minimally
invasive surgery. This technique results in not only organ preservation, but also rapid postoperative recovery. Our patient developed no
pancreatic fistula according to the International Study Group of Pancreatic Fistula, and no other complications such as bile leakage or
duodenal ischemia. LDPPHR is technically feasible at our center. It is known that laparoscopic surgery of the pancreas has developed slowly,
mainly due to the complex anatomy, rich blood supply, and critical surgical skills. Between March 2013 and June 2015, we successfully
performed laparoscopic pancreatoduodenectomy in 120 cases using the 5-hole approach. Although there are no published reports on LDPPHR, we
have completed this complex surgery based on our experience. Although open and LDPPHR involve different operative pathways, the key surgical
points are the same and are as follows: to ensure the blood supply in the duodenum and bile duct, Takada et al demonstrated that the
posterosuperior pancreatoduodenal artery is important to avoid ischemia. In our case, retropancreatic fascia and fibrotic tissue along the
CBD were preserved to ensure the blood supply. Avoid injury to the intrapancreatic CBD. Two common reasons contributing to injury are the
difficulties in identifying the pancreatic segment of the CBD and the use of a hook. Therefore, an ultrasonically activated scalpel was used
to bluntly dissect the pancreatic tissue step by step. The bile duct was thus identified easily. Prevention of intraoperative pancreatic
fistula. As reported in Beger's studies,[ 14 15] the incidence of pancreatic fistula was high. In our case, pancreatic fistula did not
occur. Four factors, such as reliable pancreaticojejunostomy, definite suture of the duodenal side of the MPD, embedding of the residual
pancreatic tissue near to the duodenum, and coagulation of the ultrasonically activated scalpel, may have prevented this complication. In
conclusion, our study indicates that LDPPHR for the treatment of SPN not only resulted in complete resection of the pancreatic tumor, but
also contributed to rapid postoperative recovery. However, the long-term outcome of this procedure needs to be confirmed by the completion
of more clinical trials. The authors thank Zhongsheng Zhao, from Department of pathology, Zhejiang Provincial People's Hospital, for
providing the pathological data with this case. Abbreviations: CBD = common bile duct, CT = computed tomography, DPPHR = duodenum-preserving
pancreatic head resection, LDPPHR = laparoscopic duodenum-preserving pancreatic head resection, MPD = main pancreatic duct, SPNs = solid
pseudopapillary neoplasms. Jiayu Zhou and Yucheng Zhou are equally to this study. Disclosure: The authors have no funding and conflicts of
interest to disclose.
