Psoas abscess is a rare clinical disease of various origins. Most common causes include hematogenous spread of bacteria from a different
primary source, spondylodiscitis or perforated intestinal organs. But rarely some abscesses are related to malignant metastatic disease. In
this case report we present the case of a patient with known squamous cell carcinoma of the cervix treated with radio-chemotherapy three
years prior. She now presented with a psoas abscess and subsequent complete inferior vena cava thrombosis, as well as duodenal and vertebral
infiltration. The abscess was drained over a prolonged period of time and later was found to be a complication caused by metastases of the
cervical carcinoma. Due to the massive extent of the metastases a Whipple procedure was performed to successfully control the local progress
of the metastasis. As psoas abscess is an unspecific disease which presents with non-specific symptoms adequate therapy may be delayed due
to lack of early diagnostic results. This case report highlights the difficulties of managing a malignant abscess and demonstrates some
diagnostic pitfalls that might be encountered. It stresses the necessity of adequate diagnostics to initiate successful therapy. Reports on
psoas abscesses that are related to cervix carcinoma are scarce, probably due to the rarity of this event, and are limited to very few case
reports. We are the first to report a case in which an extensive and complex abdominal procedure was needed for local control to improve
quality of life. Psoas Abscess is a rare disease with a multitude of etiologies. It can be divided into primary and secondary abscesses each
with different etiology and predominant age prevalences. Primary abscesses are mainly due to a hematogenous spreading of bacteria. In
western countries primary psoas abscess mostly occurs in immunocompromised patients such as diabetics, alcoholics and HIV positive patients
1,2. The most frequent microbial cause of psoas abscess is Staphylococcus aureus . Secondary psoas abscess originates from perforated
intestinal organs such as perforation in diverticulitis , perforated appendicitis or perforation secondary to colon cancer [2, 4]. Other
causes include direct spread of inflammation seen in pyelonephritis or spondylodiscitis with the latter being the most frequent cause of
abscedation. Consequently bacteria from the intestinal gram-negative flora such as escherichia coli, enterobacter, clostridia and
bacteroides can be found . In the case of spinal infection, staphylococcus aureus and mycobacterium tuberculosis are the pathogens mostly
found in the abscess . Patients mostly present with non-specific symptoms such as back or hip pain, fever, general malaise or weight loss .
Difficulty of making the correct diagnosis can be attributed to its non-specific presentation as well as its rarity. As a result appropriate
diagnostics are often delayed leading to inadequate treatment . Treatment of the primary cause remains the only curative treatment. Only
very few cases of malignant psoas abscess secondary to metastatic squamous cell carcinoma can be found in literature which are presented in
Table 1. All those patients presented with non-specific symptoms such as thigh pain or fever. In most of the cases several diagnostic steps
were necessary to make the correct diagnosis and initiate the appropriate therapy. We report a case of malignant psoas abscess secondary to
metastatic cervical cancer which required an extensive abdominal procedure.Table 1Summary of literature showing cases of psoas abscess in
metastatic squamous cell carcinoma of cervixAuthorsAgeFIGO Stage of SCCSymptoms at presentation at hospitalPrimary diagnosisDiagnostic tools
in order of applicationInitial Treatment of cervical cancerTreatment for metastases/abscessMicrobiology of psoas abscessComplication of
metastasesSingh et al. 24IIIBVaginal discharge, abdominal painTuboovarian abscess, pelvic inflammatory disease and AIDSCT, FNACPatient
refused radiationNo specificSterileNoneGeorge, Lai 60IIBLeft flank mass, backpainMetastatic renal cell carcinomaLumbar X-ray, ultrasound,
MRI, CT-guided FNACradiotherapySurgical drainageSterileLeft kidney loss of function, vertebral infiltration L1-L3Bar-Dayan et al.
50NANANACT-guided FNACchemotherapyIntralesional chemotherapyNAIliac bone distructionLüring et al. 36NABack painPregnancy associated back
painUltrasound, MRI, sonogrpahy guided drainage and cytologychemotherapySonography guided drainageSterileIliac bone and nerve
infiltrationKalra et al. 60IIBBack painTuberculoid psoas abscesCT, MRI, CT-guided biopsyRadiochemotherapyRadiotherapy after histological
findingSterileVertebral infiltrationBasu, Mahajan 52IIIBThigh painNAFDG-PET/CT, MRI, FNACRadiochemotherapyRadiochemotherapyNANoneAskin et
al. 54NAHip pain, feverPsoas abscessCTRadiochemotherapyPiperacillin/Metronidazole, resection of abscess, ureter and sigmoid
colonBloodculture sterileUreter and sigmoid colon infiltration CT computed tomography, FIGO International Federation of Gynecology and
Obstetrics, FNAC fine-needle aspiration cytology, MRI magnetic resonance imaging, NA not available, SCC squamous cell carcinoma Summary of
literature showing cases of psoas abscess in metastatic squamous cell carcinoma of cervix CT computed tomography, FIGO International
Federation of Gynecology and Obstetrics, FNAC fine-needle aspiration cytology, MRI magnetic resonance imaging, NA not available, SCC
squamous cell carcinoma A 51 year-old female patient was admitted to our emergency department due to fever and general malaise. Three years
earlier, the patient had been treated for locally advanced squamous cell carcinoma of the cervix. The initial stage of the tumor was
reported to be TNM; T3b-T4a, N1, M0; International federation of gynecology and obstetrics; FIGO stage IIIb based on pelvic MRI and whole
body PET-CT scan. There was an involvement of the parametria, upper third of the vagina, external compression of the right ureter causing
hydronephrosis (biopsy of the pelvic sidewall on the right side revealed no cancer) and three suspicious iliac lymph nodes. She was treated
with a curative intent using concurrent chemo-radiotherapy. For external beam radiotherapy, whole pelvic irradiation of 50.4 Gy was
delivered in 25 fractions over 5 weeks as intensity modulated radiotherapy concurrently with chemotherapy (Vinorelbin) followed by boost
irradiation to the tumor region of 9 Gy in 5 fractions. Weekly high-dose rate intracavitary brachytherapy delivered 20 Gy in 4 fractions
(over a duration of 5-weeks). Follow up indicated no evidence of local recurrence or metastatic disease, with the exception of an enlarged
paracaval lymph node. Initial laboratory investigation demonstrated an elevated leukocyte count and C-reactive protein. A CT-scan showed an
abscess formation in the right psoas muscle and retroperitoneum with connection to the right kidney capsule and a fistula with intestinal
lumen (Fig. 1). A CT guided interventional drain was placed. Microbiological culture grew Citrobacter freundii, Enterococcus faecalis and
Prevotella buccae. All of those belong to the bacterial flora of the intestine suggestive of intestinal perforation. An antibiotic regime
with sultamicilline/clavulanic acid was started in accordance with the findings of microbiology. We irrigated the abscess continuously. This
resulted in a significant decrease of the initially elevated inflammatory parameters. Additionally an endoscopic examination was performed
to further investigate the suspicion of a duodenal perforation. This confirmed a duodenal ulcer with covered perforation at the ventral side
of the second part of the duodenum. Biopsies showed cell formations in accordance with an edge of a perforated ulcer but no malignancy.
Closure with an over the scope clipping (OTSC) and high-dose proton pump inhibitor therapy resulted in local control and significant
clinical improvement. Surgical intervention was not intended at that point because the abscess decreased in size. After further improvement
of the clinical condition of the patient, she was discharged to follow-up with the drains in place.Fig. 1Abdominal CT scan at admission.
Axial slices of a contrast enhanced computed tomography showing a 29 x 41 mm abscess (thick white arrow) in the right psoas muscle (a).
Positive oral contrast media marking the fistula (small white arrow) from the thickened wall of the duodenum (white arrowhead) to the
abscess (b) Abdominal CT scan at admission. Axial slices of a contrast enhanced computed tomography showing a 29 x 41 mm abscess (thick
white arrow) in the right psoas muscle (a). Positive oral contrast media marking the fistula (small white arrow) from the thickened wall of
the duodenum (white arrowhead) to the abscess (b) Two months after discharge she presented with a transient ischemic attack (TIA) to our
neurology department caused by a high grade stenosis of the left internal carotid artery. She was treated with carotid endarterectomy in our
vascular surgery department and commenced on aspirin. Because of continuous and partially bloody secretion from the drain we performed a
follow up gastroscopy and CT-Scan which showed no intraluminal duodenal changes and a continuous decrease in the size of the ulcer. It did
however note regional progress of the known psoas abscess and partial destruction of the second lumbar vertebral body (Fig. 2) which was
interpreted as osteitis. Furthermore, imaging revealed an involvement of the inferior vena cava and aorta in the abscess with discrete
retroperitoneal air attributed to inflammation. Antibiotic therapy was administered with piperacilline/tazobactame in accordance with
microbiological findings from the drain of Klebsiella pneumoniae, Escherichia coli and still Enterococcus facalis and Citrobacter freundii.
The patient was discharged again but returned to our emergency department two weeks later complaining of back pain radiating to her right
thigh. Blood tests demonstrated newly elevated inflammatory parameters and anemia. This time a CT-Scan showed progression of the vertebral
body destruction and a complete thrombosis of the inferior vena cava with an inflammatory reaction of the vessel (Fig. 3). In view of the
high risk of life threatening hemorrhage from possible perforation of the inferior vena cava we decided on an explorative laparotomy. This
revealed a massive tumorous infiltration of the duodenum. The tumor was closely attached to the surrounding organs; therefore the only
reasonable treatment option was a pylorus preserving partial duodenopancreatectomy (Whipple procedure). Cellular pathology reported a
metastatic cervical squamous cell carcinoma. After an uneventful postoperative course the patient was discharged two weeks post-surgery.
Following surgery, the case of the patient was discussed in our interdisciplinary tumor board and palliative chemotherapy was recommended.
However, due to multiple comorbidities and the patient’s suboptimal performance status, chemotherapy was not performed. During the last
12 months of follow-up period, the patient showed no clear evidence of an extensive local recurrence or distant metastatic disease. However,
the patient is still suffering from chronic back pain related to spondylodiscitis at L2/L3. After orthopedic evaluation surgical therapy was
recommended. However, she refused further surgery and opted for outpatient antibiotic treatment.Fig. 2Initial follow-up CT scan 2 months
after treatment with percutaneous drainage showing a marked decrease in size of the abscess (thick white arrow; a), however, Osteolytic bone
lesion in adjacent second lumbar vertebra (small white arrows a and b), a streaky densification of the pericaval connective tissue and a
nearly complete thrombotic occlusion of the infrarenal inferior vena cava (white arrowhead c)), which was probably infected (small gas
bubbles). Infection related air bubbles in the retroperitoneal space can also be seen now along the aorta to below the aortic
bifurcationFig. 3consecutive follow-up CT scan showing constant size of the abscess (thick white arrow) (a, c), progressive osteolytic
lesion (small white arrow) (b), and infectious thrombus in the inferior vena cava (white arrowhead) Initial follow-up CT scan 2 months after
treatment with percutaneous drainage showing a marked decrease in size of the abscess (thick white arrow; a), however, Osteolytic bone
lesion in adjacent second lumbar vertebra (small white arrows a and b), a streaky densification of the pericaval connective tissue and a
nearly complete thrombotic occlusion of the infrarenal inferior vena cava (white arrowhead c)), which was probably infected (small gas
bubbles). Infection related air bubbles in the retroperitoneal space can also be seen now along the aorta to below the aortic bifurcation
consecutive follow-up CT scan showing constant size of the abscess (thick white arrow) (a, c), progressive osteolytic lesion (small white
arrow) (b), and infectious thrombus in the inferior vena cava (white arrowhead) Squamous cell carcinoma of the cervix mostly infiltrates
pelvic organs directly but it also frequently metastasizes to the paracaval retroperitoneum . Similar to our case about 31 % of stage III
cervical carcinomas show local tumor recurrence after radiochemotherapy . Occurrence of retroperitoneal metastases has been considered an
aggressive form of cervix carcinoma predominantly seen in HIV-positive women . Retroperitoneal metastases may infiltrate intestine or
vertebrae . This may result in extensive tumor necrosis and abscess formation as in the presented case and other case reports (Table 1). The
diagnostic approach to psoas abscess is complicated because of its non-specific symptoms which may be misleading. Therefore diagnostic steps
vary widely as underlined by the cases in Table 1. Ultrasound and X-ray may help raise suspicion of psoas abscess but the final diagnosis is
mostly established by CT-scan which is considered the gold-standard . Previous studies have shown that muscle metastases might be
interpreted as an abscess as around 27.7 % tend to appear like an abscess on CT-images . None of the cases presented had metastases of
cervical carcinoma as primary diagnosis. Only histological sampling may confirm the primary cause of the abscess. In all of the reported
cases microbiological culture of the aspirate was negative (Table 1). Nevertheless some patients were initially treated with antibiotics
until a final diagnosis was established as they presented with elevated inflammatory parameters. In contrast to the cases in Table 1 we
obtained a positive microbiological culture which was probably due to duodenal perforation. In the context of infectious psoas abscess the
therapeutic standard is image-guided drainage accompanied by sufficiently long-term antibiotic therapy . In literature controversy exists
whether percutaneous drainage is superior and more successful compared to open surgical drainage. With modern interventional radiology a CT
guided percutaneous drainage is a feasible and safe intervention to perform [1, 2, 16]. It has been suggested, however, that patients with
percutaneous drainage more often show recurrence if the abscess is accompanied by a higher degree of inflammation presenting on the CT-scan
by inclusion of air [6, 17]. Image-guided drainage and open drainage was performed in some of the cases in Table 1 [14, 18]. Our patient was
also treated with a CT-guided drain which remained in place for almost four months. Although the abscess showed a decrease in size it never
resolved fully which was attributed to the malignant origin of the disease. From the other cases it is evident that only a correct
histological classification of the abscess could lead to an appropriate treatment of the primary cause which is concurrent chemoradiotherapy
[12, 19, 20]. The surgical exploration in our patient was undertaken because of the suspected risk of major bleeding given the sudden onset
of anemia within two weeks. This might have been caused by bleeding from the gastroscopically shown duodenal ulcer/perforation. Kanthan et
al. have reviewed gastro-intestinal metastases of squamous cell carcinoma of the cervix that presented with gastro-intestinal bleeding .
Only three of those bleeds were localized in the duodenum. As the second possible cause of bleeding we suspected hemorrhage from the
inferior vena cava which was thrombosed and involved in the inflammatory process as shown by CT-imaging. The nearly complete thrombotic
occlusion of the inferior vena cava is may be related to a compression of the vein by surrounding inflamed connective tissue that led to an
abnormal blood flow. Data in the literature supports this assumption [21, 22]. Proposed therapeutic regimens for such an inflammatory
thrombus are anticoagulation and drainage of the adjacent abscess or percutaneous thrombectomy with anticoagulation and antibiotic therapy .
However, in the case of inflammatory thrombosis secondary to metastatic disease this therapeutic approach is ineffective as demonstrated in
the presented case. Combining the information provided in literature and analyzing the course of our case retrospectively, an early
operation would have been the most suitable approach to the psoas lesion. The treatment in our case was influenced by some misleading
results such as the radiological interpretation of the lesion as being an abscess, the positive bacterial culture of the abscess and
endoscopy showing a perforated duodenal ulcer without histological confirmation of malignancy. This case reiterates the complexity of psoas
abscess regarding diagnosis and therapy. In order to be able to treat a malignant abscess successfully it is of utmost importance to obtain
a sufficient histological specimen. This may allow applying a suitable therapeutic strategy without delay. We thank Alexandra Dudek and
Maximilian Mehdorn for critically revising the manuscript. We acknowledge support from the German Research Foundation (DFG) and Leipzig
University within the program of Open Access Publishing. The data that support the findings of this case study are included in the
manuscript. MM and WTK prepared the manuscript. TOP was in charge of radiologic diagnostic and therapy and provided CT images. WTK and MB
performed the operation. MM and BJW were involved in the conservative treatment. All authors read and approved the manuscript. The authors
declare that they have no competing interests. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this Case report
and any accompanying images. A copy of written consent is available for review by the Editor of this journal. Not applicable.
