A traumatic sternal fracture with extensive mediastinal abscess and concomitant native valve endocarditis is an extremely rare but
catastrophic situation. For 2 weeks, the co-infected patient was treated with aggressive debridement for the mediastinitis, change of
vacuum-assisted closure therapy dressings, vegetectomy and valve repair through lower partial sternotomy, and delayed primary wound closure.
To the best of our knowledge, this successful staged strategy has not been previously reported. We believe that our quick decision about
repeated surgical interventions and preservation of the manubrium led to a favorable result. A mediastinal abscess because of a primary
traumatic sternal fracture is uncommon in healthy individuals [1, 2]. Additionally, native valve endocarditis with concomitant sternal
mediastinitis is an extremely rare but catastrophic situation. To the best of our knowledge, this catastrophic situation has not been
previously reported, nor has a successful strategy been employed to manage this situation; hence, we report a successful surgical strategy
for this serious, co-infected case. The patient was an 87-year-old healthy female with only a medical history of hypertension. One month
earlier, she experienced blunt chest trauma. During this period, general malaise and intermittent fever occurred. Initially, the patient was
admitted to another emergent hospital because of excruciating chest pain and severe dyspnea. Emergent computed tomographic (CT) scan
demonstrated a transverse mid-body fracture of the sternum with surrounding fluid collection. The patient was transferred to our institution
with a diagnosis of traumatic sternal fracture with mediastinal abscess. On admission to our institution, the patient had high grade fever.
Initial laboratory data demonstrated a white blood cell (WBC) count of 25,100/uL and C-reactive protein (CRP) of 340 mg/L. Blood culture was
positive for Gram-positive cocci in clusters and vancomycin was immediately started. A few days after admission, her inotropic requirement
increased progressively as her hemodynamic status deteriorated. She was endotracheally intubated and follow up images showed progressive
changes. The abscess could be seen extending to both the anterior and posterior aspects of the fractured sternum and to the left pectoralis
muscles and subcutaneous tissues (Fig. 1a, b). Moreover, transesophageal echocardiography was done because of her bacteremia and it showed a
large vegetation in the mitral valve with moderate insufficiency (Fig. 2a). We believed that definitive surgical treatment involving
aggressive debridement, probably followed by vegetectomy, is the only effective method of saving our seriously co-infected patient with
extensive mediastinitis and concomitant mitral valve endocarditis with large vegetation.Fig. 1Contrast-enhanced computed tomography images
4 weeks after blunt chest trauma. a Sagittal image and b Axial image. The sternum was fractured and the mediastinal abscess can be seen
anterior and posterior to the sternum (arrowheads) and extending to the left pectoralis muscles (arrows). Four weeks after traumatic
accident Fig. 2Concomitant mitral valve endocarditis. a Transesophageal echocardiography showed a large vegetation (15 × 17 mm) on the
posterior mitral leaflet (arrowheads) and moderate insufficiency because of leaflet perforation (arrows). b Intraoperative mitral valve
findings through the left atrial approach. Upper; A large vegetation was present on the middle posterior leaflet {P2 scallop}. Lower;
Complete resection and repair of mitral valve using autologous pericardial patch (arrowheads). Concomitant mitral valve endocarditic
Contrast-enhanced computed tomography images 4 weeks after blunt chest trauma. a Sagittal image and b Axial image. The sternum was fractured
and the mediastinal abscess can be seen anterior and posterior to the sternum (arrowheads) and extending to the left pectoralis muscles
(arrows). Four weeks after traumatic accident Concomitant mitral valve endocarditis. a Transesophageal echocardiography showed a large
vegetation (15 × 17 mm) on the posterior mitral leaflet (arrowheads) and moderate insufficiency because of leaflet perforation (arrows). b
Intraoperative mitral valve findings through the left atrial approach. Upper; A large vegetation was present on the middle posterior leaflet
{P2 scallop}. Lower; Complete resection and repair of mitral valve using autologous pericardial patch (arrowheads). Concomitant mitral valve
endocarditic The patient was taken to the operating theater the next day. We performed a median incision and drained the mediastinal
abscess, debrided her fractured sternum, including the cartilaginous portions of the transverse second and third ribs, the left internal
mammary artery and the left pectoralis muscles with necrotic subcutaneous tissues. The manubrium of the sternum was spared from debridement
since there was no gross evidence of infection, leaving a 12-cm defect in the mid-portion of the sternal body. After the debridement,
vacuum-assisted closure (VAC) therapy with continuous saline washing was performed. The first wound culture demonstrated the presence of
Methicillin-sensitive S. aureus (MSSA), and the antibiogram was identical to that of the MSSA isolate from the blood. Intravenous vancomycin
was changed to intravenous cefazolin. Over the next week, she underwent two wound irrigation procedures. Although subsequent cultures at
dressing changes were all negative in this period, she had continuously high grade fever and her laboratory data still demonstrated high.
After extensive discussion of the benefits and risks of the surgical intervention because of the significant co-morbidities, we decided to
perform the vegetectomy and mitral valve repair. The cardiopulmonary bypass was established through lower partial sternotomy. Surgery
revealed perforation with a large vegetation of the posterior mitral leaflet, which was completely resected and successfully repaired with
an autologous pericardial patch (Fig. 2b). The aortic crossclamp time was 98 min and cardiopulmonary bypass time was 132 min. After 4 days,
the lower sternum was apposed using sternal wires and the chest wound was completely closed with an omental flap (Fig. 3a, b).Fig.
3Contrast-enhanced computed tomography two months postoperatively. a Sagittal image. b Axial image. The manubrium of the sternum was intact
(arrows) and a healthy omental flap covered the sternal defect (arrowheads). Postoperative computed tomography Contrast-enhanced computed
tomography two months postoperatively. a Sagittal image. b Axial image. The manubrium of the sternum was intact (arrows) and a healthy
omental flap covered the sternal defect (arrowheads). Postoperative computed tomography There were no pulmonary complications and the
patient received intravenous cefazolin for 8 weeks. At the 8th month follow-up period, the patient showed no signs of infection and was
doing well without any significant mitral insufficiency. There are some reports of sternal fractures with osteomyelitis as a complication of
closed chest cardiopulmonary resuscitation , and are not uncommon in the setting of antecedent chest wall trauma, such as thoracic surgery
[4, 5]. However, a mediastinal abscess because of a primary traumatic sternal fracture is uncommon [1, 2]. Cuschieri et al. identified the
presence of hematoma, intravenous drug use, and a source of staphylococcal infection as risk factors for developing a posttraumatic
mediastinal abscess . Of note, the majority of these patients have an underlying systemic disease such as diabetes mellitus, liver
dysfunction, or compromised host . In our case, the patient had no remarkable co-morbidity, experienced only a traumatic episode 1 month
earlier and she was accompanied by the native valve endocarditis. To the best of our knowledge, this catastrophic situation is extremely
rare and has not been previously reported, nor has a successful strategy been employed to manage this situation; hence, we described this
case. Once diagnosed this serious co-infected case, the primary concern of any surgical procedure is to control the bacteria infection .
Treatment of mediastinitis may depend on the degree severity of the infectious; conservative therapy for mild infections, or single staged
intervention such as debridement and primary wound closure for moderate infections, or leaving the wound open and second-stage closure using
the several closure techniques available for severe cases [9, 10]. Urbanski et al. reported a case of chronic sternal osteomyelitis after
radiation and severe aortic valve stenosis . The patient was treated simultaneously by sternal debridement and concomitant aortic valve
replacement, and single-stage primary wound closure. This was a case of chronic non-severe mediastinitis; therefore, the single staged
intervention could be performed. In our case, the mediastinal abscess was already extensive and progressed in a few days; furthermore, the
patient had concomitant endocarditis with uncontrolled infection and considerable risks of embolism from the lerge vegetation. Thus, we
decided on a staged strategy: first, open drainage for mediastinitis; second, cardiac operation for endocarditis; and finally, primary wound
closure with omental flap. It remains unclear when the endocarditis with the vegetation should be treated in this co-infected situation. For
example, Kang et al. demonstrated that early surgical intervention in patients with large vegetation (a diameter greater than 10 mm) may
significantly decrease embolic events and in-hospital mortality . Moreover, the risk of embolism has been reported to be particularly high
during the first week after diagnosis. However, cardiac operations performed too early had the disadvantage of increasing the risk for
recurrent mediastinitis. In our patient, although she had VAC therapy for about 2 weeks and underwent four procedures from initial
debridement to cardiac operation, the infection was not controllable because of the large vegetation. We thought this timing was best to
perform the vegetectomy. In treating the mitral valve endocarditis, several surgical approaches may be employed. The right thoracotomy
approach could avoid going through the infected field and decrease the recurrence of the bacteria. However, the major disadvantage is the
need for an additional right-sided thoracotomy incision, which requires a longer mechanical ventilation period, as is often the case with
our older patients after aggressive debridement of the sternum. With partial sternotomy, Kaneda et al. reported the usefulness of a lower
partial sternotomy for acutely infected endocarditis in patients with tracheostoma . When the manubrium of the sternum could be spared from
debridement, the lower partial sternotomy approach was associated with benefits, including thoracic stability because of preservation of the
sternoclavicular joint and the upper ribs. In our case, we believe that lower partial sternotomy could be performed and sparing the
manubrium of sternum led to a favorable result. In conclusion, this successful staged strategy has not been previously reported. We believe
that our quick decision about repeated surgical interventions and preservation of the manubrium led to a favorable result. VAC, vacuum-
assisted closure therapy; CT scan, computed tomographic scan The authors have no funding, financial relationships, or conflicts of interest
to declare. We thank the medical care staff of the circulation team of Okinawa Prefectural Nambu Medical Center and Children’s Medical
Center for their dedication in patient care and helping with the data collection. The authors declare that they have no funding. Not
applicable. HM designed the report and completed the manuscript. HM, YM, KM, HT and MS were in charge of patient care. HM operated on the
patient and were responsible for the postoperative care as well. TU and TK revised the manuscript, and TK supervised all the work. All the
authors have read and approved the final manuscript. The authors declare that they have no competing interests. Written informed consent was
obtained from the patient for publication of this report and any accompanying images. Not applicable.
