Authors’ Contribution: Study Design Data Collection Statistical Analysis Data Interpretation Manuscript Preparation Literature Search Funds
Collection Conflict of interest: None declared Patient: Male, 59 Final Diagnosis: Acute hepatitis E infection Symptoms: Fever • jaundice •
fatigue • loss of appetite Medication: — Clinical Procedure: Medical management Specialty: Gastroenterology and Hepatology Mistake in
diagnosis Hepatitis E virus (HEV) is the most common cause of enterically acquired acute viral hepatitis worldwide with major prevalence in
the developing countries. An increasing number of sporadic cases of acute HEV infection have also been found in developed countries, but
there is still no role for HEV testing in cases of seronegative acute hepatitis in such nonendemic regions. A 59-year-old male residing in
the United States for seven months with a history of malaria treated one year ago presented with fatigue and cholestatic jaundice with very
high bilirubin levels. Hepatitis A, B, and C viral serology along with other atypical infections were ruled out. No history of any kind of
drug intake was reported. Liver biopsy was obtained and was suggestive of acute hepatitis. Eventually hepatitis E immunoglobulin M was
checked and was found positive. The patient was treated with supportive care and improved gradually with normalization of liver function
test in a few weeks. Autochthonous HEV infection must be suspected in cases of acute viral hepatitis in developed countries. Timely
detection of HEV infection is necessary, especially in immunocompromised patients, in whom treatment is required to eradicate the infection.
Hepatitis E virus (HEV) was identified in 1983 when a researcher voluntarily ingested a pooled extract of feces from soviet soldiers
suffering with acute hepatitis in Afghanistan. This resulted in acute hepatitis in the volunteer, and small virus-like particles were found
in his stool with the help of electron microscopy . Since then, HEV has been found to be the most common cause of acute viral hepatitis
worldwide and of large epidemics in developing countries . Recent studies have now shown the occurrence of sporadic HEV cases in many
developed countries . Here we present one such case of acute hepatitis caused by HEV infection in a metropolitan city of a highly developed
country. A 59-year-old male whose only medical history was of malaria in the past presented with yellowish discoloration of skin and dark
urine for four days. The patient reported having subjective fever and chills for six days prior to presentation. These were associated with
fatigue, body aches, and loss of appetite. He denied any other gastrointestinal or genitourinary symptoms, recent travel, or sick contacts.
He emigrated from Guyana, a Caribbean country on the northern mainland of South America, 7 months ago. He was sexually inactive and denied
any use of alcohol, tobacco, or illicit drugs. He denied taking any over-the-counter or prescribed medicines or herbal supplements. He
denied any personal or family history of liver disease. Admission vitals revealed sinus tachycardia at 117 beats/min, but were otherwise
normal. Physical examination on presentation was significant for icteric sclera and distended abdomen with hypoactive bowel sounds. A
nontender liver edge was palpable. Laboratory studies on admission were significant for white blood cell count (WBC) 16.8×10{9/L with 8%
bands, platelet count 77×10{9/L, blood urea nitrogen (BUN) 31 mg/dL, creatinine 1.69 mg/dL, serum total bilirubin 9.27 mg/dL, and serum
conjugated bilirubin 6.44 mg/dL. Aspartate aminotransferase (AST) was 50 IU/L and alanine aminotransferase (ALT) was 44 IU/L. Computed
tomography scan of the abdomen without contrast showed hepatic enlargement with fatty infiltration, and cholelithiasis with no evidence of
cholecystitis. Infectious disease and gastroenterology services were consulted. Peripheral smear for parasites including malaria was
negative. Viral hepatitis serology (hepatitis A, B and C), Epstein-Barr virus (EBV), Venereal Disease Research Laboratory test-rapid plasma
reagin (VDRL-RPR), Rocky Mountain spotted fever Ab, Ehrlichia, Anaplasma, HIV, Leptospira, and Brucella were all negative. Transferrin
saturation was 11.68% with serum ferritin 535.9 ng/mL, ceruloplasmin 47.9 mg/dL (normal 25–63 mg/dL), and 24-urine Hg level <2 µg/L (normal
<21 µg/L). Serum acetaminophen and salicylate levels were negative. Blood and urine cultures were negative. During the patient’s hospital
stay, liver function tests (LFTs) were consistently deranged with the highest AST 108, ALT 182, lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) 313, serum total
bilirubin 21.4, and serum conjugated bilirubin 17.6 (day 4 of hospitalization). Mildly positive values for anti-smooth muscle antibody at 1:
20 and immunoglobulin G4 (IgG4) at 128 mg/dL (2.4–121 mg/dL) were noted. Antinuclear antibody (ANA) and anti-mitochondrial antibody tests
were negative. A liver biopsy showed mild portal inflammation, predominantly lymphocytic, with mild intra-hepatocellular cholestasis, focal
ductile proliferation, and minimal fibrosis suggestive of acute hepatitis. The patient was initially empirically treated with doxycycline
for 5 days for suspected leptospirosis, which was then discontinued because of a negative workup. HEV IgM antibody was later checked and was
found to be positive. LFT continued to improve gradually with symptomatic treatment and patient was discharged home on as-needed oral
hydroxyzine for pruritus after an in-hospital stay of about 2 weeks. At 90 days post-discharge, the patient was symptom free with normal
LFT, kidney function, and platelet count. HEV is a small, spherical, nonenveloped virus with a single-stranded, positive-sense RNA. It is
7.2 kb in length and has short 5’ and 3’ noncoding regions and three open reading frames . HEV has four major genotypes: Genotypes 1 and 2
are found mostly in developing countries, genotype 3 is found mostly in North America, South America, and Europe, and genotype 4 is found
mostly in Asia . HEV is suspected in patients with recent travel to endemic countries, where it is mainly transmitted via the fecal-oral
route; but many cases of HEV are autochthonous, possibly related to zoonotic transmission via consumption of raw or undercooked pigs, wild
boar, and deer HEV has an incubation period of 3 to 8 weeks, followed by a short prodromal phase and then symptoms of jaundice lasting days
to several weeks . HEV infection is highly unrecognized in developed countries and can be mistaken for drug-induced liver injury in patients
with otherwise negative viral serology. It is also known to cause extra-hepatic disorder like pancreatitis and aplastic anemia, and
neurological disorders like Guillain-Barre syndrome, polyradiculopathy, cranial nerve palsies, and seizure. Acute HEV can be diagnosed with
the detection of anti-HEV IgM, which is present on day 4 after the onset of jaundice and can persist for 3–5 months. Detection of anti-HEV
IgG signifies previous exposure to HEV. The gold standard for the diagnosis of active HEV infection is by detection of HEV RNA in biologic
specimens. It can be detected in stool and serum for about 6 and 4 weeks, respectively, since the onset of illness. HEV RNA detection
depends on early suspicion of HEV infection on patient presentation and timely specimen collection; thus, undetectable HEV RNA does not rule
out recent infection. HEV RNA detection has a significant role in the detection of active HEV infection in immunocompromised and transplant
recipient patients, in whom HEV serology can be false-negative because of immunosuppression . HEV infection is generally self-limiting in
immunocompetent patients, but is known to cause chronic hepatitis in immunocom-promised patients and needs to be treated. Treatment mainly
consists of reducing the dosage of immunosuppressive therapy to help in the clearance of HEV. Ribavirin has also been shown to be effective
in solid organ transplant recipients and in patients with persistent chronic infections Our patient did not have any associated risk factors
for HEV infection, and the only meat he reported to have consumed in the six months prior to this hospitalization was cooked chicken, last
eaten about a month before the illness. He was found to have only mild elevation in hepatic transaminases, with a very high bilirubin level.
This is similar to the case series of HEV outbreak on a cruise ship returning from a world tour in the UK, where only five of the ten
symptomatic patients had ALT >2 times the upper normal limit and only two out of three had AST >2 times the upper normal limit . Similarly,
among the cases reported by Dalton et al. in New Zealand, one of the case patients had only a modest elevation in ALT (552 IU/L). Also, the
wife of another symptomatic patient was found to be positive for HEV (IgM, IgG, and polymerase chain reaction ), but had normal LFT. In the
case under discussion, specimens of HEV RNA and genotype were not collected early in the disease course due to late suspicion of HEV
infection, and then due to the nonavailability of the test in local laboratories. Until now, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration has not
approved the use of any serological tests to diagnose HEV infection in the United States . Despite its increasing incidence in developed
countries, there is no place yet for HEV testing in the diagnostic algorithm for acute hepatitis in developed countries. Autochthonous HEV
infection must be suspected in cases of acute viral hepatitis in developed countries.
