Primary bone lymphomas (PBL) are extremely rare malignant neoplasms. The most commonly described subtype of PBL is diffuse large B-cell
lymphoma (DLBCL). DLBCL within peri-prosthetic membrane of a joint is exceedingly rare. To the best of our knowledge this case is the second
reported Epstein-Bar-Virus (EBV) negative DLBCL in a peri-prosthetic membrane in the literature. We report an 80 year old female patient who
developed a DLBCL with chronic inflammation in association to a metallic implant in the left knee. This lymphoma in contrast to the usually
described DLBCL in the peri-prosthetic membrane was EBV negative by EBER in situ hybridization as well as by polymerase chain reaction
(PCR). This report challenges the concept of DLBCL associated with chronic inflammation and raises the question of other pathogenetic
factors involved in the pathogenesis of this rare disease. Lymphoma is the seventh most common systemic malignancy worldwide [1, 2]. DLBCL
is the most common aggressive Non-Hodgkin Lymphoma (NHL) and in addition the most common type of PBL . Over the last decades, the use of
joint replacement surgery, such as total hip and total knee arthroplasty, has increased . Despite this fact lymphomas developed within the
peri-prosthetic membrane are exceedingly rare. These lymphomas may be observed in a context of chronic inflammation with EBV, which seems to
play a central role in disease development. Since 2008 this entity has been included in the World Health Organization (WHO) classification
of Haematopoietic and Lymphoid Tissues as “DLBCL associated with chronic inflammation” [1, 5].Fig. 1Radiography of the left knee shows a
loosening of the prosthesisFig. 2 a HE stained section shows connective tissue with massive hyalinization and sclerosis and skeletal muscle
with a centrally, circumscribed, nodular infiltration of large lymphoid cells. b The predominant cellular component consisted of blasts,
with round and notched nuclei with clear chromatin and multiple nucleoli. c In the immunohistochemistry staining the blasts reveal an
expression of CD 79a. d In the immunohistochemistry staining the blasts reveal an expression of CD 20 Radiography of the left knee shows a
loosening of the prosthesis a HE stained section shows connective tissue with massive hyalinization and sclerosis and skeletal muscle with a
centrally, circumscribed, nodular infiltration of large lymphoid cells. b The predominant cellular component consisted of blasts, with round
and notched nuclei with clear chromatin and multiple nucleoli. c In the immunohistochemistry staining the blasts reveal an expression of CD
79a. d In the immunohistochemistry staining the blasts reveal an expression of CD 20 In 2004 a 69 year old woman underwent total left knee
replacement with a cemented knee endoprosthesis for osteoarthritis. In February 2015 a loosening of the prosthesis was diagnosed
radiologically (Fig. 1) in association with a rupture of the collateral ligament. The patient underwent replacement of the prosthesis in
August 2015 with ASA 4 (American Society of Anesthesiology Classification) because of multiple comorbidities. The listed comorbidities
included adipositas, diabetes mellitus, high blood pressure, hyperlipidaemia and coronary heart disease. In addition the patient showed in
clinical chemistry positivity for HBVc (Hepatitis B Virus core) antibody but negativity for Hepatitis B by PCR. The peri-prosthetic membrane
was removed and a new prosthesis was implanted without complications. The peri-prosthetic membrane was sent to the Institute of Pathology to
exclude infection. The histological examination showed infiltration by a DLBCL. Clinically the patient showed no signs of generalization. A
chemotherapy with (R-)-mini-CHOP (with 50 % of Cyclophospamid, Doxorubicin and Oncovin) was started. Because of the positivity of HBVc
antibody the Mabthera therapy started in the 2nd cycle after confirmation of negative Hepatitis B PCR. After chemotherapy she received a
total irradiation dose 40 Gy with conventional fractions. At a follow-up of 8 months the patient did not show any sign of recurrence. The
specimen sent for histological examination measured 2:1,5:0,8 cm and revealed grey-white tissue. The histolologic examination showed
connective tissue with massive hyalinization and sclerosis with a centrally, circumscribed, nodular infiltration of large lymphoid cells
(Fig. 2a). The predominant cellular component consisted of blasts, with round and notched nuclei with clear chromatin and multiple nucleoli
(Fig. 2b). The mitotic activity was high with 4 mitoses per high power field. Between the blasts a few polymorphic small reactive
lymphocytes were present. The blasts showed strong expression of CD 20, CD 79a (Fig. 2c), CD20 (Fig. 2d), PAX 5 and bcl-2 by
immunohistochemistry. Only a small subset of blasts demonstrated a positive staining with CD 30 and bcl-6 (<5 %). Staining for EBER (in situ
hybridisation for EBV with INFORM EBER) and CD 15 were negative. In addition the atypical B-cell population did not express CD10, MUM1,
GCET1, CD33, myeloperoxidase, C-MYC, CD117c and FOXP1. The proliferation index (MIB) was 80 %. The diagnosis of a DLBCL was supported by
performing a PCR, demonstrating a gene rearrangement in the immunoglobulin heavy chain gene with a monoclonal peak at 243 bp and an
immunoglobulin light chain gene rearrangement with a monoclonal cell population kappa A at 288 bp. EBV was additionally excluded by a PCR
using Lightcycler analysis. Performing a Low Density Whole Genome Copy Number Variation with next generation sequencing (NGS) we could not
detect any copy number variation. Furthermore mutational analysis of the full coding sequence of the TP 53 gene did not demonstrate
mutations in TP 53. Primary lymphoma of the bone is rare, accounting for 3–7 % of malignant bone neoplasms and 4–5 % of extra-nodal Non-
Hodgkin lymphomas . Primary Non-Hodgkin lymphomas arising in the peri-prosthetic membrane around metallic implants are extremely rare. The
carcinogenic effects of the metallic components and wear particles are not yet fully elucidated . Most cases reported in this context are
DLBCL associated with chronic inflammation and concomitant EBV infection [2, 7]. Campo et al. report, that in these lesions lymphomas-
infected cells frequently express a latency type 3 with positivity for the viral proteins latent membrane protein 1 and EBV nuclear antigen
2, suggesting, that the lymphoid proliferation may be related primarily to a decrease in the host immune-surveillance . Our described case
of DLBCL, however, lacks EBV infection and is localized to the knee without any other site of involvement. A summary of our literature
search (see Table 1) showed only one case of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma in association with a joint replacement without EBV association
and was published in 2011 . Another case was reported with negativity for the EBV in situ hybridization, but positivity for EBV in the
polymerase chain reaction . All reported cases did not show any signs of generalization [2, 7–13].Table 1Shows a summary of presented cases
in the literature including our recent caseJournalAge/SexLocalisationLatencyDiagnosisEBV statusOur case80 femaleLeft
knee11 yearsDLBCLEBERinsitu -PCR -Acta Haematol. 2011;126(3):141–6. 76 maleRight Tibia3 yearsDLBCLEBERinsitu -Am J Surg Pathol 2005; 29:
832–836. 78 maleRight knee22 yearsDLBCLEBV IHC + EBERinsitu +Journal of Clinical Oncology, Vol 31, 2013: pp e148-e151. 69 maleLeft
knee3 yearsDLBCLEBERinsitu - PCR +Arch Orthop Trauma Surg 2008; 128: 1387–1390. 70 femaleLeft kneeAbout a half yearDLBCLnot availableJ
Arthroplasty. 2001 Feb;16(2):229–32. 97 femaleLeft hip12 yearsHigh-grade Non-Hodgkin’s B-cell lymphomanot availableJ Arthroplasty. 2006
Sep;21(6):926–30. 75 femaleRight tigh13 yearsMalignant immunoblastic lymphomanot availableJ Clin Pathol. 1998 Aug; 51(8): 629–632. 63
femaleLeft tigh4 yearsDiffuse centroblastic lymphomanot available25 maleRight tibia8 yearsDiffuse centroblastic lymphomanot availableCancer.
1981 Aug 15;48(4):1009–11. 48 maleLeft tibia17 yearsMalignant lymphomanot available Shows a summary of presented cases in the literature
including our recent case In the context of our case we would like to challenge the concept that “DLBCL associated with chronic
inflammation” is always associated with EBV infection. In our case EBV could clearly not be demonstrated by otherwise classic features of
“DLBCL associated with chronic inflammation”. Although the pathogenesis in our case is not fully elucidated, we hypothesize that other
factors may play a role in this context. Especially metallic ions are known to have carcinogenic potential. After a metal implantation a
significant increased concentration of cobalt and chromium in the synovial fluid and blood could be measured. These metallic ions have
mutagenic effects and have been described to potentially predispose to lymphomas . In 2004 Landon et al. report about an increase in
chromium and cobalt levels, an increased incidence of chromosomal translocation and an aneuploidy in the peripheral blood of patients within
2 years after metal-on-metal joint arthroplasty . In addition a higher level of HBVc antibody was incidentally found in our patient. Gross
et al. states that a negative HBV DNA does not rule out an HBV infection . In the literature a connection between Hepatitis B virus
infection and Non-Hodgkin lymphomas is described . It is suggested that HBV is not only a hepatotropic but also a lymphotropic disease and
participates in the development of malignant lymphoproliferative disorders. For viral clearance the cellular and humoral immunity plays an
important role for HBV infection and disease progression. The cellular and humoral immunity system gets activated after HBV infection. The
immune system destroys the HBV infected cells and the host cells, which are infected by HBV . However, the mechanisms are not fully
elucidated [19, 20] and several theories are suggested. Proposed theories include :Chronic stimulation of B-cells is the problem for DNA
damage and transformation into B- cell NHL.Chronic local antigenic stimulation could be associated with a development of lymphoma.HBV-
encoded X-protein (HBx) inhibits p53 in hepatocytes and this mechanism causes hepatocellular carcinoma. The inhibition of p53 in B-cells may
cause malignant transformation into a NHL. However this theory can be excluded by performing mutational analysis covering the whole coding
sequence of TP53.The infection of epithelial cells might serve as a trigger for expression, production or release of hematopoietic tumor
growth factor.A coinfection with another unknown virus is suggested to cause lymphoma. Chronic stimulation of B-cells is the problem for DNA
damage and transformation into B- cell NHL. Chronic local antigenic stimulation could be associated with a development of lymphoma. HBV-
encoded X-protein (HBx) inhibits p53 in hepatocytes and this mechanism causes hepatocellular carcinoma. The inhibition of p53 in B-cells may
cause malignant transformation into a NHL. However this theory can be excluded by performing mutational analysis covering the whole coding
sequence of TP53. The infection of epithelial cells might serve as a trigger for expression, production or release of hematopoietic tumor
growth factor. A coinfection with another unknown virus is suggested to cause lymphoma. We report a case of an 80 year old woman, who
developed an EBV negative DLBCL in the peri-prosthetic membrane 11 years after total knee arthroplasty. The presented case demonstrates that
EBV infection might not be obligatory in DLBCL associated with chronic inflammation. This report challenges the concept of DLBCL associated
with chronic inflammation and raises the question of other pathogenetic factors involved in the pathogenesis of this rare disease. American
Society of Anesthesiology Classification Diffuse large B-cell lymphoma Epstein- Bar-Virus Gray Hepatitis B Virus Deoxyribonucleic acid
Hepatitis B Virus core HBV-encoded X-protein Next generation sequencing Non-Hodgkin Lymphoma Primary bone lymphoma Polymerase chain reaction
World Health Organization We thank the patient, who requested anonymity, for agreeing to our report and for providing a detailed medical
history. No funding has been gained by the authors for this research. The dataset supporting the conclusions of this article is included
within the article. CBS, BLA and SS participated in the design of the study and histopathological evaluation, and drafted the manuscript. KK
and MG assisted in drafting the manuscript and revised the manuscript. AL revised the manuscript. All authors have given approval for the
final version to be published. The authors declare that they have no competing interests. A written informed consent was obtained from the
patient for publication of this case report and any accompanying images. Not applicable.
