Gastropericardial fistula is a rare life-threatening condition, being reported only 65 times in modern literature. A 67 year-old man who
presented with weight loss, chest pain and epigastric pain was found to have pericardial effusion and pneumopericardium on computed imaging.
Endoscopy and histology confirmed a gastric adenocarcinoma within a hiatus hernia, which had fistulated to the pericardium. His condition
was complicated by pulmonary emboli and lobar infarction, all contributing to rapid deterioration and death. Review of all previously
published cases reveals that factors which predict poorer prognosis are older age, cancer etiology and conservative management. Conversely,
protective factors include younger age at presentation, previous gastroesophageal surgery or ulcers as an etiology, and aggressive
procedural and surgical management. Although the diagnosis is viewed as largely fatal by many clinicians, operative management has
contributed to a statistically significant reduction in mortality from 69 % in the pre-2000 era to 11 % in the post-2000 era. This study
summarizes diagnostic methods and treatment interventions and prognostication in this rare condition. Gastropericardial fistula is a life-
threatening abnormal communication between the stomach and the pericardial sac. This condition is rare and its etiologies include previous
gastric or esophageal surgery, ulcer perforation or cancer perforation. It usually occurs within a hiatus hernia and rarely occurs
transdiaphragmatically. A review of all published cases reveals that aggressive procedural and surgical management has reduced mortality
from 69 to 11 % in the last 15 years. This study details diagnostic methods and treatment interventions and prognostication in this rare
condition. A 67 year-old male presented to his local hospital with six weeks of extreme lethargy. He complained of non-radiating chest and
epigastric pain with associated breathlessness and anorexia. On further questioning he admitted to 25 kg weight loss over the previous six
months. He reported a past history of empyema occurring decades previously. Examination revealed normal heart sounds, an irregular
tachycardia with a pulse of 100 beats/min, raised jugular venous pulse, widespread peripheral edema, vesicular air entry to lungs, no
abdominal signs, and no lymphadenopathy. Vital signs revealed a pyrexia of 39 °C, relative hypotension of 110/67 mmHg, pulse oximetry 95 %
on air, a tachypnea of 26 breaths/min and normal urine output. Laboratory investigations showed hemoglobin 57 g/L (125–160 g/L), MCV 71 fL
(80–100 fL), white cell count 33.6 × 109/L (4-11 × 109/L), CRP 218 mg/L (<5 mg/L), sodium 127 mmol/L (135–145 mmol/L), potassium 5.9 mmol/L
(3.5–5.5 mmol/L), creatinine 111 mmol/L (60–110 mmol/L), albumin 17 g/L (35–55 g/L), bilirubin 9 mg/L (0–17 mg/L), ALT 182 U/L (7–56 U/L),
ALP 203 (44–107 U/L). Blood film demonstrated neutrophilia with left shift consistent with severe bacterial infection, and evidence of
anemia including microcytosis, polychromasia, target cells and pencil red blood cells. Initial treatment included transfusion of 4 units of
packed red blood cells, treatment of heart failure with diuresis and of sepsis with intravenous broad-spectrum antibiotics
(tazobactam/piperacillin). Serial electrocardiograms showed sinus tachycardia with paroxysmal atrial fibrillation and widespread ST
elevation of about 2 mm in leads II, III, aVF, V3-V6 (Fig. 1), which later normalized. Serial troponin I ultra over a 24 h period after
presentation were 695, 538, 491 ng/L (<20 ng/L) respectively. It was thought this represented cardiac stress secondary to persistent
tachycardia and profound anemia. Thoracic radiogram showed a small left-sided pleural effusion (Fig. 2).Fig. 1Electrocardiogram showing
widespread ST elevationFig. 2Chest radiogram showing small left-sided pleural effusion Electrocardiogram showing widespread ST elevation
Chest radiogram showing small left-sided pleural effusion Echocardiography was obtained and showed mild left ventricular dilatation with
severe dysfunction and an ejection fraction of 25 %. There was also a 0.9 cm apical, 1.4 cm anterior and 1.3 cm posterior simple pericardial
effusion without hemodynamic compromise or tamponade. For this reason, pericardiocentesis was not performed. Computed tomogram of chest
abdomen and pelvis demonstrated right lower lobe pulmonary artery embolus with infarction of lung parenchyma, pneumopericardium and
pericardial effusion (Fig. 3a), fixed large hiatus hernia with a mass (Fig. 3b), enlarged 18 mm celiac node and unremarkable appearances
elsewhere. Subsequent gastroscopy confirmed a large hiatus hernia with a bleeding ulcerated gastroesophageal junction tumor (Figs. 4).
Serosal breaching by this mass led to fistulation into the adjacent pericardium. Histological diagnosis was subsequently confirmed as poorly
differentiated adenocarcinoma.Fig. 3Computed tomogram showing a pneumopericardium (arrow) and pericardial effusion, and b mass within a
hiatus hernia (single arrow) and likely area of fistulation (double arrow)Fig. 4Gastroscopy showing a ulcerating mass within a hiatus
hernia, and b view on endoscopic retroversion Computed tomogram showing a pneumopericardium (arrow) and pericardial effusion, and b mass
within a hiatus hernia (single arrow) and likely area of fistulation (double arrow) Gastroscopy showing a ulcerating mass within a hiatus
hernia, and b view on endoscopic retroversion After an initial improvement with antibacterial therapy and hemodynamic stabilization,
drainage of his contaminated pericardial cavity was considered, but the patient rapidly deteriorated with uncontrolled sepsis and multi-
organ failure. Management of a complex case such as this requires multidisciplinary team discussion. It was felt that aggressive management
of a cachectic man with a poor cancer prognosis and a multiple serious clinical conditions arising from this was not in his best interest as
he was unlikely to survive intervention or surgery. These discussions included the patient and his family, and led to a palliative
management approach. The first case of pneumopyopericardium caused by subphrenic abscess due to gastric ulceration was described by Hallin
in 1863 (cited by Pick) . Nine similar cases were described subsequently . The first description of a direct communication between the
stomach and the pericardial sac was by Harp and colleagues in 1947 , in which they described the perforation of a gastric tumor into the
pericardium. A comprehensive literature search identified a further 64 cases of gastropericardial fistula, of which one publication which
was unobtainable . Of the 65 cases including ours, 63 % of patients were men and 37 % were women giving a male:female ratio of 3:2. The mean
age of presentation was 59 years (median 63 years). The modes of presentations included, in order of frequency, chest or left shoulder pain
(66 % of cases), dyspnea (22 %), epigastric pain (20 %), fever (14 %) and dysphagia/vomiting/hematemesis/melena (12 %). Interestingly, in
some cases, patients had presented months or years earlier with these symptoms, but the diagnosis was not evident from baseline
investigations [3, 5–8]. For patients ultimately diagnosed with gastropericardial fistula, typical investigational findings in the
literature reflected our own case: widespread ST elevation consistent with pericarditis and pneumopericardium on plain or computed
tomography. Radiographic investigations can be enhanced by the use of oral contrast medium, which reveals fistulous communication from the
gastrointestinal tract into the pericardial space. The use of gastroscopy is considered controversial by many authors due to the theoretical
risk of causing pneumopericardial tamponade, but no study to date has shown this to be of any clinical significance including our own. The
etiologies for gastropericardial fistula include previous gastroesophageal surgery, ulcer perforation, gastric cancer or a combination of
the above. These etiologies and their frequencies are listed in Table 1. Prior operative risk factors for gastropericardial fistula were
open or laparoscopic Nissen’s fundoplication, previous esophagectomy, hiatus hernia repair, bariatric surgery and other surgery as well as
trauma. The mean time of presentation was 84 months after surgery (median 60 months).Table 1Gastropericardial fistula etiologies and their
frequenciesEtiology of gastropericardial fistulan% of all etiologiesGastroesophageal surgery and subsequent formation of an ulcer2031Ulcer
perforation1828Previous surgery1828 - Open or laparoscopic Nissen’s fundoplication- (6)- (9) - Bariatric surgery and other surgery- (4)-
(6) - Esophagectomy- (4)- (6) - Hiatus hernia repair- (2)- (3) - Trauma- (2)- (3)Cancer perforation69Previous esophagogastrectomy for
neoplasia with subsequent cancer recurrence35 Gastropericardial fistula etiologies and their frequencies Prior to the year 2000, average
survival of those presenting with gastropericardial fistula was 31 %. The average age at presentation was 65 years and ulcer etiology was
relatively common compared with subsequent years. All survivors had operative and interventional management including pericardiocentesis,
pericardial/thoracic washout, pericardial window/pericardectomy, surgical fistula closure and ulcer repair or upper gastrointestinal tract
repair. Of those who died, the majority were managed conservatively (64 %) and the remainder had an attempt at operative management (38 %).
None of the patients who had cancer as an etiology survived. Post-2000, average survival increased markedly to 89 %. The average age of
presentation was lower at 54 years, and this may contribute to the lower mortality seen. Prior gastroesophageal surgery was more common as
an etiology than in previous years. Only 6 % of survivors lived with only conservative management such as antibiotics and total parenteral
nutrition; the remaining all had surgery to correct the gastropericardial fistula or procedural intervention such as pericardial drain. Of
those who died, half were managed conservatively , half with pericardiocentesis [10, 11] and none with surgery. Of patients who had cancer
as an etiology, 40 % survived and 60 % died. In the cancer patients who lived, intervention included total parenternal nutrition thus
allowing for ulcer healing and surgery with Ivor Lewis resection, lymphadenectomy, and pericardostomy . These outcomes are summarised in
Table 2.Table 2Outcomes in patients with gastropericardial fistulaPre-2000Post-2000Mean age at presentation65 years54 yearsPredominant
etiologyUlcer (75 %)Previous upper GI surgery (65 %)Survival31 %89 %Survivors/with operative intervention100 %94 %Survivors/no operative
intervention0 %6 % Outcomes in patients with gastropericardial fistula Taking all 65 cases into account, 89 % of survivors had surgery
whereas only 20 % of non-survivors did. In the group with perforating cancer, all patients who survived had surgery or pericardiocentesis ,
whereas only half of those who died had surgical or procedural intervention [7, 10, 11]. Interestingly, those who survived were, on average,
13 years younger than those who did not (mean age of survivors 54 years, mean age of non-survivors 67 years) and this was mirrored in those
with a cancer etiology (mean age of survivors 54 years, mean age of non-survivors 62 years). This analysis suggests that survival not only
depends on younger age, but also on intervention/surgery, although the obvious confounder is that extremely unwell patients who are unlikely
to survive surgery are not taken to theatre and have poorer outcomes, as was the case in our patient. However, interpretation of the above
data is complex and amounts to Level C evidence (expert opinion, series of case studies). Without exception, all cases recommend
antibacterial therapy, optimization of fluid status and diversion of GI content away from the fistula plus nutritional support (Grade 1C
evidence). The treatment effect of interventional procedures or surgery is less clear. It would be our conclusion that intervention (eg.
pericardial drainage) should be considered in most patients order to temporize sepsis (Grade 2C), whilst more definitive management may be
planned for a later time. Since patients fare better with surgery than without (Table 2), this approach should be strongly considered even
in multi-morbid patients since this may be their only chance of survival (Grade 3C). Gastropericardial fistula is a rare diagnosis. Its
early diagnosis is often obscured by its own rarity and the non-specific signs and symptoms associated with it. Its etiologies include
previous upper GI surgery, perforating gastric ulcers and perforating cancers. The latter two occur more frequently in a heterotopic stomach
such as in hiatus hernia. Patients may present with this diagnosis months before the ultimate presentation, and this diagnosis should be
strongly suspected in patients with the above risk factors who present with chest/shoulder pain, dyspnea, pyrexia or upper GI symptoms. The
most sensitive investigations are likely to be CT with oral contrast which may reveal a gastropericardial fistula and pneumopericardium, as
well as echocardiogram which may reveal pericardial effusion. All patients should receive antibacterial/antifungal therapy, hemodynamic
stabilization, diversion of GI contents away from the fistula as well as nutritional support. Patients should be considered for
interventional procedures such as pericardial drainage. In patients not improving with the above approach, appropriate early surgical
intervention is key to survival and should not be delayed. Clinicians should consider that a seemingly poor surgical candidate’s only chance
of survival is operative management. Multidisciplinary team involvement is recommended for improved patient care in this complex and rare
condition. VA gratefully acknowledges help from the Hinchingbrooke library team in obtaining articles used in this study; Dr Phil Roberts
and the reviewers for their helpful comments on the manuscript; and Dr Anitha Mathews for financial support with publication costs.
Hinchingbrooke medical educational fund for publication costs. Available as supplementary material. VA reviewed the clinical case, performed
the literature search, analyzed the findings and wrote the manuscript. VA is a Clinical Lecturer in Gastroenterology & Hepatology,
University of Cambridge, UK. The author declares that she has no competing interests. Informed consent from the patient was not possible due
to the patient’s outcome. His family granted their assent for publication. Not required.
