Hepatic artery pseudoaneurysm as a complication of laparoscopic cholecystectomy is considered a rare, potentially life threatening
condition. We report a case of late onset hemobilia presenting 8 months following elective laparoscopic cholecystectomy with complex biliary
and vascular injury. The patient was treated surgically with primary repair of the aneurysm and hepaticojujenostomy. A high index of
suspicion should be raised when encountering a patient with massive upper GI bleeding and a previous history of hepatobiliary manipulation
or surgery regardless of postoperative period. Hemobilia and vascular injuries are among the most important - albeit not necessarily the
most common- complications of laparoscopic cholecystectomies (LC), due to the high morbidity and mortality associated with the condition .
The symptoms of hemobilia commonly appear within the early postoperative period or as late as 4 weeks . Alongside with a detailed literature
review, we report a case presenting 8 months after LC with right hepatic artery pseudo aneurysm in association with a complex injury to the
common bile duct. To our knowledge there are two similar cases in the literature reporting a delayed hepatic artery pseudoanyrusm presenting
up to a year following LC [4, 5] (Table 1).Table 1Summary of similar cases (post laparoscopic cholecystectomy hepatic artery pseudoaneurysm)
reported in the literatureAuthorAgeGenderPresentationdiagnosisTime of presentationProcedureOutcomeGenyk YS 57 yearsFPain, UGIB and
jaundice.HPA2 weeksEmbolization2 year follow upJean-Denis Yelle, et al. 48 yearsFPain, UGIB.Contrast study of the fistula, ERCP& HPANAOpen
laparotomy6 monthSiablis D, et al. 29 yearsMPain, jaundice and UGIB.HPANAEmbolizationClose follow upsSam T.M. Kwauk, et al. 39 yearsFN\V,
pain and jaundice.CT and HPANASelective embolization4 monthRibeiro A, et al. 57 yearsFPainUGI endoscopy, CT and HPA13 monthsEmergent
laparotomy.NAde Blaauw I, et al. 38 yearsFPains and melenaNANAEmergent laparotomy.7 monthT nicholoson et al.
43 yearsFHematemesisNA43 daysEmbolizationWell at 15 month69 yearsM10 daysWell at 5 years54 yearsF5 daysWell at 7 years42 yearsF8 daysWell at
4 years65 yearsF18 daysWell at 6 years47 yearsF6 daysWell at 3 years39 yearsM7 daysWell at 5 years68 yearsF9 daysWell at
2 years53 yearsF12 daysWell at 6 yearsDogru O, et al. 62 yearsFUGIBUltrasound and UGI endoscopyNAExploratory laparotomyNAIannelli A et al.,
,36 yearsFNot mentionedNANASelective embolizationNAG Roche-Nagle, et al. 58 yearsFPain, and vitally collapsedCT & HPANAExploratory
laparotomyUneventful recovery.Mandur Ma et al. ,57 yearsMUGIBNA2 weeksEmbolizationWell at 22 month63 yearsFUGIBNA4 weeksEmbolizationWell at
12 month54 yearsMUGIBNA3 weeksLigationWell at 6 monthsNakase Y, et al. 63 yearsFPain and UGIBHPANASelective embolizationNAMasannat YA
71 yearsNot mentionedAngiogramNACoil embolizationNASrinivasaiah N 57 yearsMPain and hematemesisUltrasound, CT and HPA4 weeksRadiological
interventionNAYao CA, et al. 54 yearsMPain, UGIB, and disturbed LFTs.CT.NAAngiography with embolizationNASansonna et al.,
44 yearsFUGIBCT3 weeksAngiography with embolizationWell at 2 weeksPaseka T et al., 51 yearsMUGIBCT & HPA.MonthsExploratory laparotomyWell at
6 months.AD Mate et al., 45 yearsMLGIBHPA15 daysEmergency laparotomyNAEl Bouhaddouti, et al. 50 yearsMPain, jaundice and UGIBUGI endoscopy &
HPA3 monthsEmergent laparotomy.1 yearThamer A. Bin Traiki et al. 65 yearsMFebrile (38.9 °C, (left brachial vein Thrombosis).CT, ERCP, &
HPA.4 weeksAngiography and embolization.well at dischargeTun-Abraham ME et al., 67 yearsMBiliary leakage, sepsis and late intra-abdominal
bleedingCT.NAAngiography with embolizationNo evidence of recurrent bleedingAbdallah S et al., 40 yearsMObstructive jaundice and painCT &
HPA.NASelective embolizationNAChih yang Hsiao et al., 40 yearsMJaundice, pain and oozing blood from drainage.MR & HPA.2 weeksEmbolization
and angiography.NA Abbreviation definition: NA not available, UGIB upper gastrpintestinal bleeding, HPA hepatic selective angiography, ERCP
endoscopic retrograde cholangiography, LC laparoscopic cholecystectomy Summary of similar cases (post laparoscopic cholecystectomy hepatic
artery pseudoaneurysm) reported in the literature Abbreviation definition: NA not available, UGIB upper gastrpintestinal bleeding, HPA
hepatic selective angiography, ERCP endoscopic retrograde cholangiography, LC laparoscopic cholecystectomy A 41-year-old female patient
presented to our emergency department with history of upper gastrointestinal (UGI) bleeding in the form of painless coffee ground vomitus
and melena. Patient has no significant past medical history apart from uneventful elective laparoscopic cholecystectomy due to a remote
episode of acute cholecystitis in another institution 8 months prior to her presentation. Upon reviewing the patient’s charts, the operation
was smooth, no intraoperative complications encountered, monopolar cautery energy source was used and no intraoperative cholangiogram was
obtained. The patient had history of previous attack of minimal UGI bleeding 6 weeks post cholecystectomy, at that time an upper endoscopy
and ERCP were done showing hemobilia, and a stent was placed in the common bile duct. Following that, the patient was relieved of symptoms
and a CT study confirmed the presence of a small (<0.25 cm) right hepatic artery pseudoaneurysm. The patient was offered the option of
embolization, however she refused the treatment and lost follow up until the current presentation. Upon her presentation to our center, the
patient was pale, tachycardiac (100–110 bpm) and normotensive. Abdomen was soft and lax with no sign of peritonitis were noted upon
palpation. Hemoglobin: 10.3 g\L, Hematocrit: 33, Platelets: 44 × 109/L. Coagulation profile was normal and Liver function showed a mild
elevation of the liver enzymes. The patient was hospitalized and resuscitated, after which she was prepared for an emergency UGI endoscopy,
where no bleeding source was identified in the stomach or duodenum. However, blood was noticed flowing from the major duodenal papilla
raising suspicion of hemobilia. On ERCP the old stent was dislodged and a stricture was identified at the common bile duct (CBD) extending
into the hepatic duct but below the bifurcation. In addition, the bile duct was filled with clots and the right hepatic artery started to
fill with contrast. A plastic stent was placed across the stricture (Fig. 1). CT abdominal angiography was done showed saccular lesion at
the right hepatic artery suggestive of the presence of pseudo-aneurysm (1.5 cm) (Figs. 2 and 3). Bleeding was initially controlled following
the ERCP (stenting). Shortly after, the patient deteriorated again, with a drop of her hemoglobin to 7.7 g\L, she was transferred to the
critical care unit, resuscitated with 4 units of PRBCS and platelets. Patient was hemodynamically stable and referred for angiography for
angio-embolization, which was not successful due to failure to cannulate the common hepatic artery. The patient continued to experience
gastrointestinal bleeding requiring further transfusion of blood products. She was taken to the operating room for an emergency exploratory
laparotomy.Fig. 1ECRP study: showing the stricture of the CBD (straight arrow), with filling defect of the CHD and contrast filling the
right hepatic artery communication between hepatic artery and CHD (angulated arrow)Fig. 2CT study, an axial cut: the arrows points at, A:
right hepatic artery psuedoaneurysm B: Stent C: common hepatic arteryFig. 33D angiogram demonstrating aneurysm of hepatic artery (straight
arrow) ECRP study: showing the stricture of the CBD (straight arrow), with filling defect of the CHD and contrast filling the right hepatic
artery communication between hepatic artery and CHD (angulated arrow) CT study, an axial cut: the arrows points at, A: right hepatic artery
psuedoaneurysm B: Stent C: common hepatic artery 3D angiogram demonstrating aneurysm of hepatic artery (straight arrow) Exploration of the
abdomen was obtained through a midline laparotomy; there was no evidence of heamoperitonium. After obtaining proximal control of the common
hepatic artery, isolation of right hepatic artery was difficult. The area of the porta hepatis was thickened and edematous probably due to
previous cholangitis and ERCPs. The CBD was divided to facilitate the exposure of the right hepatic artery. Following that, the right
hepatic artery course was isolated and controlled proximal to the pseudo-aneurysm (Fig. 4). Upon dissection the aneurysm was accidently
opened with minimal back bleeding. The wall of the pseudo aneurysm was refreshed and the right hepatic artery was closed in a primary repair
fashion.Fig. 4Intra-operative: the arrows points at, A: (white) Common bile duct, B: (black) Right hepatic artery Intra-operative: the
arrows points at, A: (white) Common bile duct, B: (black) Right hepatic artery Roux-en-y hepatico-jujenostomy was performed. The stent has
migrated and it was felt in the transverse colon, it was retrieved through a colotomy. The patient had an uneventful recovery apart from
wound infection. Her LFT gradually returned back to normal levels. After discharge the patient had been followed up for 14 months with no
evidence of reoccurrence of bleeding. Laparoscopic cholecystectomy (LC) carries the risk of biliary and vascular iatrogenic injuries even in
the hands of most experienced surgeons. Despite its many benefits in comparison to open procedure it carries a 10-fold increased risk of
iatrogenic biliary and vascular injuries . Laparoscopic biliary tree injuries are reported in 0.3–1 % of procedures, whereas vascular
injuries reported in 0.25–0.5 % (7–9). It is well known in the literature that intraoperative bleeding is the most common manifestation of
LC iatrogenic arterial injury followed by ligation. A less common manifestation of post LC iatrogenic arterial injury is presented here.
Approximately 10 % of all the reported cases of hemobilia are secondary to iatrogenic hepatic artery pseudo-aneurysms (Table 1) (8). Upper
GI hemorrhage is the most common presentation of a ruptured right hepatic artery pseudo-aneurysm into the biliary tract. However, the
classic presentation of hemobilia known as Quinke’s triad is seen in less than 40 % of patients [1, 6, 7]. To date, the definite
pathological explanation of post LC hemobilia is still unclear but suggested mechanisms are mechanical, thermal injuries specially monopolar
coagulation during laparoscopic surgeries and surgical clips encroachments . Bile leak and superimposed infection are important
precipitating factors, It has been reported that bile acid could contribute to the injury to the vascular wall resulting in delayed healing
of the vessel wall which leads to the development of pseudoaneurysm . We believe the mechanism of injury in our patient is thermal, due to
the presence of vascular and biliary injuries and her delayed presentation. There are several options for diagnosing and managing such
condition, Upper gastrointestinal endoscopic evaluation is fundamental to exclude the more common causes of UGI bleeding . In the current
Literature nearly 12 % of cases reported diagnosed endoscopically . Contrast enhanced computed tomography of the abdomen aids in determining
the diverse etiological causes of the hemobilia . The difficulty in making the diagnosis of hemobilia might be attributable to the fact that
the bleeding is usually intermittent. The management of hemobilia is an acute emergency as patient might exsanguinate when ruptured. The
therapeutic aim is to stop the bleeding and to relive biliary obstruction . Transarterial embolization (TAE) is the treatment choice for all
causes of hepatic artery aneurysm with a high rate of success, surgical intervention should be done for selected patients who fail a trial
of embolization (12) as in our case. Angiography offers the advantage of minimally invasive procedure, and it also represents an effective
treatment choice for this potentially fatal complication [15, 16]. Surgery is narrowed to conditions requiring; bile duct repair, extra-
hepatic lesion or gallbladder hemorrhage, and for failure of TAE [15, 17]. The time phase between confirming the diagnosis of hemobilia and
the decision for surgical intervention in case of absence or failure of embolization is crucial and must be managed meticulously by the
attending surgeon. As these patients are at risk of sudden rupture and exsanguination. A high index of suspicion should be considered by all
treating surgeons when encountering instances of hemobilia in patients presenting with upper GI hemorrhage with a past history of
cholecystectomy regardless of the post-operative period. Assessment of the hepatic arteries is an important aspect of the investigation of
all biliary injuries. Intraoperative preventive measures are paramount in preventing these complications, such as careful dissection and the
avoidance of cautery usage adjacent to the vasculo-biliary structures during LC. ᅟ The authors declare that they have no financial interest
to declare in relation to the content of this article. All data and material presented in the article are available upon request. MA:
literature review and summarized all previous similar cases, wrote part of introduction and discussion. AN: wrote the case details and
clinical coarse, improved the introduction and photography. RJ: surgeon who performed vascular repair in the case, reviewed the whole
manuscript, offered critiques and improved the discussion. YQ: reviewed the whole manuscript, offered critiques and improved the discussion.
MA: surgeon who performed the operation, reviewed the case, wrote part of discussion and introduction. All authors read and approved the
final manuscript. The authors declare that they have no competing interests. All authors agree to the terms of the Biomed Central Copyright
and License. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this case report and any accompanying images. A copy
of the written consent is available for review by the editor of this journal. This case report was approved by King Abdulaziz University
Hospital ethical committee. The authors declare no conflict of interest in the work to produce this article.
