This study analyzes the clinicopathologic and radiologic characteristics of malignant serous cystic neoplasm (SCN) of the pancreas through
systematic review and an institutional case report. A comprehensive literature search was performed in the MEDLINE database to identify
studies on malignant SCNs of the pancreas that had detailed clinicopathologic and radiologic information. A computerized systematic search
of our institutional database was also performed to identify cases of malignant SCN for addition to the systematic review. Using the final
included cases, we analyzed the clinicopathologic and radiologic features of malignant SCNs of the pancreas. A review of 136 candidate
articles identified 26 studies with 26 cases that had detailed clinical information. Our institutional data search added one case. The
systematic review of the 27 cases revealed that primary tumors (mean diameter 10.2 ± 4.0 cm) mainly involved the body and tail of the
pancreas (n = 16) and frequently invaded adjacent organs (n = 19). Distant metastases occurred in 14 patients (synchronous, n = 5;
metachronous, n = 8; both, n = 1), most commonly in the liver (n = 13). Imaging features of malignant SCNs of the pancreas were identical to
the benign counterpart, except local invasion or distant metastases. The prognosis was excellent in that 17 were alive at the time of
writing with a median follow-up period of 2 years. The malignant potential of SCNs of the pancreas should be considered in the diagnosis and
management of patients with pancreatic SCNs. Serous cystic neoplasms (SCNs) of the pancreas are usually cystic epithelial neoplasms composed
of cuboidal, glycogen-rich, epithelial cells that produce serous fluid . Pancreatic SCNs represent approximately 10–16 % of all kinds of
cystic pancreatic lesions . Since Compagno et al. classified cystic neoplasms of the pancreas into serous and mucinous types in 1978 , SCNs
were considered as a benign disease entity without risk of malignant transformation. This concept changed after George et al. reported the
first case of a malignant SCN of the pancreas in 1989 . Thereafter, the number of case reports or series of malignant SCNs of the pancreas
increased [4, 8–31]. Thus, SCNs of the pancreas are not considered totally benign, but have an extremely low malignant potential. Regarding
the incidence of malignant SCNs, the majority of literature reported less than 1 %, including the largest series which showed three serous
cystadenocarcinomas from 2622 patients , even though a few literature reported 1–5 % [5, 18, 33]. Due to its very rare chance to be
malignant, the vast majority of SCNs are safely observed without resection . As a result of their extreme rarity, the characteristics of
malignant SCNs of the pancreas were not well explored until the World Health Organization (WHO) classification published in 2010 established
the definition of serous cystadenocarcinoma and described its characteristics . In the 2010 WHO classification, malignancy is defined by the
presence of distant metastases regardless of benign-looking histologic features. However, the WHO classification is still under debate as
many studies have classified SCNs that invade surrounding organs as malignant SCNs even though there is no distant metastasis [4, 9, 12, 13,
16, 21, 22, 24, 25, 27, 29, 33]. Therefore, in this article, we use the broad term ‘malignant SCNs’ to include either SCNs with distant
metastasis or local invasion. Despite the increasing number of cases of malignant SCNs, there has been no systematic review to summarize the
variable presentations of malignant SCNs and to provide a perspective of this rare disease entity. Therefore, we performed a systematic
review of the malignant SCNs of the pancreas with the addition of our single case. A computerized search of the MEDLINE database was
conducted to find relevant studies published prior to April 30, 2015. Studies were eligible for inclusion if they described the
clinicopathologic features, imaging findings, treatment, and outcome of the cases with regard to malignant SCNs of the pancreas. Any type of
publication including case reports or case series was eligible. The following search terms were used: (pancreas OR pancreatic) AND (“serous
cystadenocarcinoma” OR “serous cystic neoplasm”). Our search did not set any restriction or filter. To expand the search, the bibliographies
of articles that remained after the selection process were screened for other potentially suitable articles. Our institutional review board
approved the search of electronic medical records for this study. We performed a systematic computerized search of our institutional
database (ABLE, Asan Medical Center) from January 1996 to April 2015 using the diagnostic codes of ‘serous cystic neoplasm of the pancreas’,
‘serous cystadenoma of the pancreas’, and ‘serous cystadenocarcinoma of the pancreas’. Using these search terms, we identified 447 patients
initially diagnosed with SCN of the pancreas. Among the 447 patients, only one case was confirmed as serous cystadenocarcinoma of the
pancreas. We obtained an informed consent from the patient. We present the clinical course, pathologic findings, and imaging features of
this case. We also included this case in the systematic review of malignant SCNs. For the malignant SCNs from the literature search and our
institution, we analyzed their clinicopathologic features, patterns of metastasis and local invasion, treatment, and outcome. When imaging
features of the primary tumors and/or metastatic tumors were available, we also analyzed these imaging findings. Our study selection process
is shown in Fig. 1. The literature search in the MEDLINE database generated 136 initial candidate articles. After reviewing the titles and
the abstracts and excluding 22 review articles, two conference abstracts, and 80 articles that were not in the field of interest for this
study, 32 articles were initially selected for eligibility. The full text of the 32 articles was retrieved. The search of the bibliographies
of these articles found four additional eligible studies. Among these 36 eligible studies with 42 cases, we further excluded three articles
that were not in the field of interest and seven studies that did not have detailed information on pancreatic serous cystadenocarcinomas,
and selected 26 studies with 26 cases [4, 7–31]. We also included the present case from our institution; thus finally 27 cases were reviewed
in this systematic review.Fig. 1Flow diagram for literature selection Flow diagram for literature selection A 52-year-old woman presented to
our institution with a palpable abdominal mass. On physical examination, a large, soft mass was palpable in the epigastrium. Results of
laboratory examinations and tumor markers (carcinoembryonic antigen and carbohydrate antigen 19–9) were within the normal range. Serum
chromogranin A was 108 ng/mL, which was around the upper normal limit (27–94 ng/mL). Contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) scans showed
a 9 × 8 cm solid and cystic mass in the head of the pancreas (Fig. 2a). The peripheral portion of the tumor was well enhanced, while the
central portion was not well enhanced. On 18F-fludeoxyglucose (FDG) positron emission tomography (PET)/CT scans, the tumor did not show any
increased uptake (Fig. 2b).Fig. 2A 52-year-old woman with malignant serous cystic neoplasm of the pancreas and metachronous hepatic
metastasis. a Contrast-enhanced CT scan demonstrates a 9 × 8 cm solid and cystic mass in the pancreatic head. b FDG-PET/CT scan demonstrates
no increased uptake within the tumor. c Photograph of the gross specimen shows a well-demarcated lobulated mass. The cut surface showed a
yellowish, gray, firm tumor with multiple microcystic changes and fibrous septa. d Photomicrograph shows multiple microcysts lined by a
single layer of cuboidal epithelium with a clear cytoplasm (H and E stain, ×200). e Contrast-enhanced CT scan shows a low-attenuating
nodular lesion with peripheral rim enhancement in liver segment VII. f On T2-weighted MR image, the liver tumor shows very bright signal
intensity like cerebrospinal fluid. g On contrast-enhanced T1-weighted MR image during the portal-venous phase, the tumor shows peripheral
rim enhancement. h Photomicrograph shows that the tumor is composed of multiple microcysts separated by collagen fibers, which are lined by
a single layer of cuboidal epithelium with a clear cytoplasm and bland-looking nuclei (H and E stain, ×200) A 52-year-old woman with
malignant serous cystic neoplasm of the pancreas and metachronous hepatic metastasis. a Contrast-enhanced CT scan demonstrates a 9 × 8 cm
solid and cystic mass in the pancreatic head. b FDG-PET/CT scan demonstrates no increased uptake within the tumor. c Photograph of the gross
specimen shows a well-demarcated lobulated mass. The cut surface showed a yellowish, gray, firm tumor with multiple microcystic changes and
fibrous septa. d Photomicrograph shows multiple microcysts lined by a single layer of cuboidal epithelium with a clear cytoplasm (H and E
stain, ×200). e Contrast-enhanced CT scan shows a low-attenuating nodular lesion with peripheral rim enhancement in liver segment VII. f On
T2-weighted MR image, the liver tumor shows very bright signal intensity like cerebrospinal fluid. g On contrast-enhanced T1-weighted MR
image during the portal-venous phase, the tumor shows peripheral rim enhancement. h Photomicrograph shows that the tumor is composed of
multiple microcysts separated by collagen fibers, which are lined by a single layer of cuboidal epithelium with a clear cytoplasm and bland-
looking nuclei (H and E stain, ×200) Pancreaticoduodenectomy was performed with a clinical diagnosis of a solid pseudopapillary neoplasm or
pancreatic neuroendocrine tumor. On the gross specimen, a well-demarcated lobulated mass was observed in the pancreas head. The cut surface
showed a yellowish, gray, firm tumor with multiple microcystic changes and fibrous septa (Fig. 2c). Vascular and perivascular invasions and
nodal involvement were not observed. Microscopic findings revealed multiple microcysts separated by collagen fibers. The inner surface of
the cysts was lined by a single layer of cuboidal epithelium with a clear cytoplasm (Fig. 2d). No mitoses or cellular atypia were noted.
Immunohistochemical staining was positive for the cytokeratins, AE1 and AE3, and negative for CD56, chromogranin A, synaptophysin, renal
cell carcinoma marker, and CD10. The epithelial cells of the tumor had cytoplasmic periodic acid-Schiff (PAS)-positive granules. The
histopathological diagnosis was serous cystadenoma of the pancreas. Five years later, the patient presented with abdominal discomfort. On
contrast-enhanced CT, there were multiple liver masses/nodules that showed peripheral rim enhancement (Fig. 2e). Under suspicion of liver
metastases, FDG-PET scanning was performed, which revealed no FDG avidity in any liver masses/nodules. There was no evidence of local tumor
recurrence or extrahepatic metastasis on FDG-PET/CT scans and body CT. The tumor showed very high signal intensity (SI) like cerebrospinal
fluid on T2-weighted magnetic resonance (MR) image (Fig. 2f) and low SI on T1-weighted image. On diffusion-weighted images and apparent
diffusion coefficient map, there was no diffusion restriction in the tumor. On multiphasic contrast-enhanced T1-weighted MR images, the
tumor showed peripheral rim enhancement in the arterial phase, portal-venous phase, and delayed phase (Fig. 2g). Ultrasound-guided biopsy
was performed for the liver masses. Pathologic results showed that the tumor specimen was composed of multiple microcysts separated by
collagen fibers (Fig. 2h). The microcysts were lined by a single layer of cuboidal epithelium with a clear cytoplasm and bland-looking
nuclei. These histopathologic features were very similar to those of the previous pancreaticoduodenectomy specimen. Finally, the histologic
diagnosis was confirmed as serous cystadenocarcinoma with metachronous liver metastasis. The patient has been observed without any treatment
for the liver metastases for 17 months after liver mass biopsy. The liver metastases have minimally enlarged on follow-up CT as the largest
liver metastasis has increased from 3.1 to 3.4 cm in the longest diameter over 17 months. However, the patient has been asymptomatic and is
still alive at the time of writing. The characteristics of the 27 included cases of malignant SCNs are summarized in Table 1. The 27 cases
were diagnosed as malignant SCNs of the pancreas because they exhibited characteristics of malignancy including local invasion and/or
distant metastasis. According to the definition of the 2010 WHO classification, which defines pancreatic serous cystadenocarcinoma by the
presence of distant metastases, only 14 cases were pancreatic serous cystadenocarcinoma. However, we also analyzed the cases with local
invasion.Table 1Characteristics of included cases of malignant serous cystic neoplasms of the pancreasAuthorYearAgeSexSigns or
symptomsLocationTumor diameter (cm)Gross morphologic pattenDistant metastatic sitesSynchronous/Metachronousa Local invasion sitesSurgical
therapyOutcomeGeorge et al198970MHemorrhage from gastric varicesbody and tail11MicorocysticLiverSynchronousStomach, spleen, splenic
veinDPDeath during operation due to hemorrhageFriedman et al.199074FRight flank pain, weight loss, palpable masshead19MacrocysticLiver,
lung, bone, adrenal glandsSynchronousNoneNoneDeath due to advanced neoplasmKamei et al.199172FJaundiceMultifocal origin (head,
body,tail)10MicrocysticNeural invasionTPNAOkada et al.199163FAbdominal painbody and tail12MicrocysticLiverMetachronous (4 years)NoneDPAlive
5 years after initial operationYoshimi et al.199263FEpigastric pain, palpable massbody and tail12MicrocysticLiverMetachronous
(3 years)NoneDPAlive 6 years after initial operationOhta et al.199364MUnrelated incidental detection of the tumor on abdominal
CTbody2.5MicrocysticPerivascular and vascular invasionEnucleationAlive 9 months after initial operationWidmaier et al199671MElevated liver
function testshead4MixedPeripancreatic fatPPPDAlive 1 year laterIshikawa et al.199863FAbdominal painbody12MicrocysticLiverMetachronous
(3 years)NoneDPNAEriguchi et al.199865FPalpable abdominal massbody and tail16MicrocysticLiverBoth (9 years)NoneDP, micorowave coagulo-
necrotic therapyAlive 10 year after initial operationAbe et al.199871FPalpable abdominal mass, general fatigue, weight lossbody and
tail12MicrocysticLymph node, peripancreatic fatDP, splenectomyAlive 2 years laterHorvath et al.199981FNANA6NAVesselDPNAWu et
al.199957FUnrelated, incidental detection of the tumor on abdominal CTentire pancreas5.5MixedLiver, peritoneumMetachronous
(10 year)StomachPancreatectomy, splenectomy, cholecystectomyRecurrence 10 years after initial tumor resectionStrobel et al.200156FRecurrent
abdominal pain, diarrhea, weight lossentire pancreas14MicrocysticLiverMetachronous (3 years)NonePPPDAlive 3 years after initial
operationMatsumoto et al.200487Fno symptom, incidental finding(inguinal hernia op)body and tail12MicrocysticSpleenSynchronousSpleen,
VesselDP with colectomyUneventful (10 months)Schintaku et al.200585FFatigue, intermittent diarrheabody and tail12MicrocysticSpleenDP, distal
gastrectomyAlive 10 months laterFriebe et al.200580FAbdominal pain, anorexia, weight lossbody and tail8MicrocysticSpleenDP, splenectomyAlive
1 year laterGupta et al.200842FAbdominal pain, palpable abdominal mass, diarrhea, weight lossbody and tail10Macrocysticperipancreatic
fat.DP, splenectomyAlive 2 years laterFranko et al.200868FFlank pain, weight loss, anemia, duodenal
bleedinghead5MicrocysticLiverMetachronous (3 years)Splenoportal vein, duodenumInoperableDeath due to advanced neoplasm, 45 months laterKing
et al.200970MAbdominal pain, hematemesishead9MicrocysticDuodenumPPPDAlive 7 years laterVadala et al.201074MNAheadNANAPortal veinPD, portal
vein thrombectomyNABano et al.201162MAbdominal pain, vomiting, weight loss, jaundicehead7MicrocysticLiverMetachronous (1 year)DuodenumPD,
microwave coagulo-necrotic therapyAlive 1 year laterCho et al.201164FDizziness, hematocheziatail12MicrocysticColon, spleen invasionDP,
segmental resection of the colon, splenectomyNABramis et al.201286FAbdominal painbody17MicrocysticLiverSynchronousStomachInoperable,
Biopsies takenDied 1 month later due to unrelated other medical problemWasel BA et al.201368FIncidental findingtail12MicrocysticLiver,
retroperitoneumInoperable, neo-adjuvant chemotherapyAlive 1 year laterRathore MU et al.201360FUpper abdominal
painbody9MicrocysticVesselsPartial pancreatectomy and splenectomyDeath 3rd post operative day due to thromboembolismKainuma O et
al.201569MUpper abdominal discomfortbody6Solid variantLiverSynchronousNoneDistal pancreatectomy(initial diagnossi) + Liver
metastatectomy(27 months later)Alive 30 months laterPresent case201552FPalpable masshead9MicrocysticLiverMetachronous (5 years)NonePDAlive
6.5 years later DP distal pancreatectomy, TP total pancreatectomy, PD pancreaticoduodenectomy, PPPD pylorus preserving
pancreaticoduodenectomy aNumber in parenthesis is time interval between detection of primary pancreatic tumor and metachronous metastasis
Characteristics of included cases of malignant serous cystic neoplasms of the pancreas DP distal pancreatectomy, TP total pancreatectomy, PD
pancreaticoduodenectomy, PPPD pylorus preserving pancreaticoduodenectomy aNumber in parenthesis is time interval between detection of
primary pancreatic tumor and metachronous metastasis The mean age of patients with malignant SCNs was 68.0 ± 10.4 years with a range of
42–87 years. The female to male ratio was 2.9 (20 females and seven males). Regarding the presenting symptoms or signs, abdominal/flank pain
was the most commonly presented (n = 13; 48.1 %), followed by a palpable mass (n = 6; 22.2 %), weight loss (n = 5; 18.5 %), gastrointestinal
bleeding (n = 3; 11.1 %), incidental detection (n = 3; 11.1 %), and jaundice or abnormal levels of serum liver enzymes (n = 3; 11.1 %). On
gross specimens, the most common pattern was the microcystic type (n = 20), which is defined as multiple cysts measuring <2 cm separated by
thin fibrous septa. The macrocystic type, which is composed of large cysts ≥2 cm, was observed in two cases. The mixed microcystic and
macrocystic type was found in two cases. There was only one case with the solid type. In two articles, there was no information on the gross
morphological type of SCN. CT or MR imaging features were available in 20 cases, in which the imaging features of the primary tumors and/or
metastatic lesions were qualitatively described. In all cases, the imaging findings of the malignant SCNs of the pancreas were basically
identical to those of benign serous cystadenoma, except for malignant behavior such as local invasion or distant metastases. The radiologic
features of serous cystadenoma or cystadenocarcinoma generally varied according to the gross morphologic pattern. Tumors with the
microcystic pattern were generally shown as well-circumscribed, multilocular masses, with or without central stellate scars. The microcysts
were not clearly identified on CT, but were very hyperintense on T2-weighted MR images. Tumors with the macrocystic pattern were shown as
well-circumscribed, lobulated masses containing a few cysts. The SCNs with a mixed microcystic and macrocystic type simultaneously showed
findings of the micro- and macrocystic types. The solid type of malignant SCN reported in one case was shown as a solid enhancing mass that
initially mimicked a neuroendocrine tumor. Regarding the malignant features, local invasion to the adjacent vessels, spleen, liver, adrenal
glands, stomach, or colon could be detected on CT and/or MR images. Among the 27 cases with malignant SCNs, 13 had hepatic metastasis. Seven
of thirteen cases described enhancement patterns and morphological characteristics of the liver metastasis. Six synchronous or metachronous
metastases in the liver were cystic masses with peripheral enhancement on contrast-enhanced CT/MRI and showed very high SI on T2-weighted
images. Only one hepatic metastatic mass showed heterogeneous wall enhancement; however, it also demonstrated very high SI on T2-weighted
images like the other masses. Taking all into account, the liver metastases, which are basically cystic masses, can be characterized as
exhibiting very high SI on T2-weighted images, with an enhancing cyst wall and/or fibrous septa. The mean diameter of the primary pancreatic
tumors was 10.2 ± 4.0 cm (range, 2.5–19 cm). The locations of the primary tumors were as follows: pancreatic head (n = 7; 25.9 %),
pancreatic body and tail (n = 9; 33.3 %), pancreatic body (n = 5; 18.5 %), pancreatic tail (n = 2; 7.4 %), entire pancreas (n = 3; 11.1 %),
or location unavailable (n = 1; 3.7 %). Local invasion of the adjacent organs occurred in 19 patients (70.4 %) including six patients with
invasion of multiple organs, as follows: adjacent vessels (n = 7; 25.9 %), spleen (n = 5; 18.5 %), peripancreatic fat (n = 3; 11.1 %),
stomach (n = 3; 11.1 %), duodenum (n = 3; 11.1 %), colon (n = 1; 3.7 %), liver (n = 1; 3.7 %), retroperitoneum (n = 1; 3.7 %), and
perineural invasion (n = 1; 3.7 %). Among the 27 cases with malignant SCNs, 14 had a distant metastasis: synchronous metastases in five
patients (18.5 %), metachronous metastases in eight patients (32 %), and both synchronous and metachronous metastases in one patient
(3.7 %). The time interval between detection of pancreatic SCN and metachronous metastases was from 1 to 10 years (median, 3 years). Among
the 14 patients with distant metastases, including two patients with metastasis in multiple organs, the sites of distant metastases were as
follows: liver (n = 13; 92.9 %), lung (n = 1; 7.1 %), bone (n = 1; 7.1 %), adrenal glands (n = 1; 7.1 %), peritoneum (n = 1; 7.1 %), and
spleen (n = 1; 7.1 %). Notably, liver metastasis was found in all patients with metachronous metastases. Among the 27 patients, only four
patients had lymph node metastases; however, the exact site of lymph node metastasis was unavailable. Regarding the treatment of primary
tumors, surgical resection of the primary pancreatic SCN was performed in 23 patients (85.2 %). Three patients were inoperable due to local
invasion (n = 2) and synchronous metastases (n = 1). In one case report focusing on histopathologic features, the treatment was not stated .
Among the 27 cases, death was reported in five patients only, which was due to either an advanced pancreatic neoplasm (n = 2), perioperative
mortality (n = 2), or unrelated medical problem (n = 1). The two patients who died from advanced tumors had metastasis in various organs.
Time to death ranged from 3 days to 45 months from the initial surgery or diagnosis. In 17 cases, patients were alive at the time of
writing, with a median follow-up period of 2 years (range, 9 months to 10 years from the initial surgery or diagnosis). Patient outcomes
were not reported for the other five patients. Our systematic review of malignant SCNs of the pancreas adds to growing evidence that SCNs of
the pancreas have malignant potential. As a result of their rarity, radiologists and clinicians generally consider SCNs of the pancreas as
benign. With the growing number of malignant SCNs, we need to establish diagnostic criteria for malignant SCNs of the pancreas. Regarding
the primary tumors, malignant transformation into cystadenocarcinoma is suggested by an increase in size, heterogeneous morphological
characteristics, and poor distinction from the surrounding pancreatic parenchyma . Direct invasion of the adjacent organs and the presence
of distant metastases are hallmarks of malignant SCNs of the pancreas. Although, the 2010 WHO classification defined malignancy by the
presence of distant metastases regardless of benign-looking histologic features, the WHO classification is still under debate as many
studies have classified SCNs that invade surrounding organs as malignant SCNs [4, 9, 12, 13, 16, 21, 22, 24, 25, 27, 29, 33]. However, it is
difficult to differentiate local invasion from mass effect in a large tumor, particularly on preoperative imaging studies. Particularly, it
is more difficult to identify the presence of local invasion in patients with SCNs as SCN is a cystic tumor. Therefore, the definition of
local invasion in SCNs on imaging studies should be more clearly established like that of vascular invasion in solid tumors. The vascular
invasion in solid tumors is usually defined as an encasement of the vessel (greater than 180° vascular circumferential involvement) or
irregular narrowing of the vessel with involvement of vessel wall by the tumor . Interestingly, in nine cases with metachronous distant
metastasis, liver metastases occurred after complete resection of the primary tumor with the time interval ranging from 1 to 10 years.
Therefore, follow-up imaging exams should include the liver. The liver metastases from serous cystadenocarcinoma are frequently cystic in
nature with a similar histology to that of the primary pancreatic tumor. T2-weighted images might be the most important sequence for
characterizing liver metastases. When new multiseptated cystic lesions are detected in the liver after resection of SCNs of the pancreas,
the possibility of metachronous liver metastases should be considered. Synchronous liver metastases occurred in five cases when the primary
pancreatic SCNs were diagnosed. The imaging features of liver metastases were similar to those of primary pancreatic SCNs. Therefore, when
multiseptated cystic lesions compatible with SCNs are found in the liver and pancreas, we should consider the possibility of pancreatic SCNs
with synchronous liver metastases from the initial diagnostic step, despite its rarity. In these cases, a more vigorous diagnostic work-up
is needed. Regarding the outcome of those included studies, two died from perioperative mortality, one died from unrelated medical problem,
and two died from advanced tumors. The other 17 patients were alive at the time of writing. These findings indicate that surgical resection
should be decided very carefully due to high perioperative mortality and relatively indolent course of malignant SCNs. In current status, it
is difficult to find predictive factors for death due to small number of death cases, warranting further evidence. Nowadays, clinicians have
a dilemma in the management of SCN of the pancreas . In general, the current management of serous cystadenomas of the pancreas is
essentially conservative. Indeed, the vast majority of cases do not need surveillance after initial diagnosis. Surgery is indicated in cases
with new symptoms or complications such as abdominal pain, pancreatitis, and biliary obstruction . Since the malignant potential in the
pancreatic SCNs is very low, pancreatic SCNs can be safely observed without surgical resection in the vast majority of cases. However, due
to its malignant potential, we need to establish certain criteria for the surveillance of SCN of the pancreas. A comprehensive panel of
patient’s symptoms/signs, imaging, cytopathology, tumor growth rate, and biological activity is essential for decision making. Thus, regular
physical exam, serum tumor markers, imaging studies including CT or MRI, endoscopic ultrasonography, and cyst fluid analysis should be
performed appropriately. Our study has limitations. First, it is a systematic literature review, hence the data such as malignant imaging
features or local invasion were extracted from individual studies. The presence of malignant imaging features or local invasion were
determined based on the imaging description in individual studies. Second, all cases were gathered from different institutions where the
clinical practice might vary, which may raise issue of heterogeneity of included cases. However, this is also an inevitable limitation of a
systematic literature review. In conclusion, the number of reported cases of malignant SCNs of the pancreas is growing, prompting
radiologists and clinicians to redefine this disease entity and establish guidelines for diagnosis and management of malignant SCNs of the
pancreas. A comprehensive panel of patient’s symptoms/signs, imaging, cytopathology, tumor growth rate, and biological activity is essential
to diagnose and manage malignant SCNs of the pancreas. Computed tomography Distal pancreatectomy 18F-fludeoxyglucose Magnetic resonance
Periodic acid-schiff Pancreaticoduodenectomy Positron emission tomography Pylorus preserving pancreaticoduodenectomy Serous cystic neoplasm
Signal intensity Total pancreatectomy World Health Organization ᅟ This work did not require any funding. JH and JHB designed and conducted
the study and drafted the manuscript. JH and KWK conducted literature search, data extraction, and data interpretation. SSL, JHK and HJK
reviewed CT and MR imaging, interpreted the data and contributed to the discussion. SMH performed pathologic review. MGL supervised the
study and contributed to the discussion, edited and approved the manuscript. All authors read, revised, and approved the manuscript. All
authors declare that they have no financial and non-financial competing interests. Our institutional review board approved the search of
electronic medical records for this study. We obtained an informed consent for publication from the patient. All data generated or analysed
during this study are included in this published article.
