Tuberculosis is endemic in India and almost 40 % of the Indian population is infected with tubercle bacilli. Tuberculosis being a great
mimicker of infectious as well as non infectious diseases and recent rise of multi drug resistant and extended drug resistant cases have
made diagnosis and management more difficult. To the best of our knowledge there have been no reported cases of tuberculosis coexisting with
malignant peritoneal mesothelioma leading to multiple site venous thrombosis. Forty five year old male, belonging to Indian/Aryan ethnicity
presented with cough, breathlessness and fever for 7 months with past history of pulmonary tuberculosis. On examination he was found to have
pleural effusion for which he received anti-tuberculosis therapy empirically. Later his condition deteriorated and on further examination he
was found to have ascites, multiple site venous thrombosis and pyothorax which was found positive for acid fast bacilli. Despite anti-
tuberculosis therapy he did not improve and was suspected to be a multidrug resistant case. Later on computed tomography peritoneal nodule
was detected and on biopsy revealed malignant mesothelioma. In a diagnosed case of tuberculosis with clinical findings compatible with it
but not responding to anti tubercular therapy, underlying secondary co-existing pathology should be explored. Tuberculosis (TB) is
considered as a great mimicker of infectious as well as non infectious pathology with multitude of clinical picture and variations. Its
ability to infect virtually any organ makes it a real health care challenge in the developing world . It is estimated that almost 40 % of
the Indian population is infected with tubercle bacilli . A poor response to treatment in a diagnosed case of tuberculosis usually indicates
drug resistant tuberculosis, however rarely it can point towards another underlying illness which has remained undiagnosed. More virulent
and resistant strains leading to multi drug resistant and extended drug resistant tuberculosis have made it extremely difficult to diagnose
a co infection or coexisting pathology. Here we report a rare case of extra pulmonary tuberculosis with acid fast bacilli positive in
pleural fluid and multiple sites of venous thrombosis with poor response to anti-tuberculosis therapy (ATT). Subsequent evaluation revealed
an underlying peritoneal mesothelioma. A 45 year old male of Indian/Aryan ethnicity who was apparently normal 7 months back was referred to
our hospital with complaints of cough for 7 months which was dry in nature and associated with breathlessness and fever. He had a past
history of pulmonary tuberculosis, 20 years ago for which he received anti-tuberculosis therapy for a period of 12 months. Three years ago
he also developed cholelithiasis for which he underwent cholecystectomy. He was evaluated elsewhere and on basis of chest X-ray findings of
consolidation and pleural effusion, anti-tuberculosis therapy (rifampicin, isoniazid, ethambutol and pyrazinamide) was started. Inspite of
3 months therapy his symptoms did not subside and he started noticing gradual abdominal distension. He was shifted to a tertiary care centre
in Dehradun where he was found to have bilateral pleural effusion with ascites. Thoracocentesis was done which showed cell count—30
(polymorph 10 % and lymphocytes 90 %), glucose—92 mg/dl, protein—2800 mg/dl, adenosine deaminase—0.93. Cartridge-based nucleic acid
amplification test for tuberculosis was negative. Contrast enhanced computed tomography (CT) revealed gross ascites, bilateral pleural
effusion, mild pericardial effusion and inferior vena cava thrombosis. He was then referred to another tertiary care centre at Delhi and he
was re-evaluated. Intercostal drainage (ICD) tube was inserted and pus drained from the pleural cavity which was positive for acid fast
bacilli (AFB) on Ziehl–Neelsen stain. Fine needle aspiration and cytology of right axillary lymphnode showed reactive lymphadenitis. Repeat
CT of chest and abdomen revealed similar finding as before with additional thrombosis in superior and inferior vena cava, right internal
jugular vein and bilateral brachiocephalic veins. Patient was then brought to our hospital. On examination he was conscious and oriented.
Pallor and anasarca were present. Bilateral crepitations with decreased air entry at base and right sided ICD tube were noted. His abdomen
was distended and shifting dullness was present. Hematological profile revealed microcytic hypochromic anemia with mild leukocytosis. Urine
routine microscopy revealed proteinuria. Renal function tests were normal, liver function tests revealed hypoalbuminemia. Blood culture and
urine culture were sterile and procalcitonin was 0.07. Anti nuclear antibody and lupus anticoagulant were negative. Chest x-ray revealed ill
defined radio opacity in left lower zone, fibrotic opacities with subsegmental atelectasis seen in bilateral upper zones and bilateral
pleural effusion with ICD tube in situ on the right side (Fig. 1).Fig. 1Chest x-ray showing ill defined radio opacity in left lower zone,
fibrotic opacities with subsegmental atelectasis seen in bilateral upper zones and bilateral pleural effusion with ICD tube in situ on the
right side Chest x-ray showing ill defined radio opacity in left lower zone, fibrotic opacities with subsegmental atelectasis seen in
bilateral upper zones and bilateral pleural effusion with ICD tube in situ on the right side Thoracocentesis was done and chylous fluid was
aspirated. Laboratory evaluation of the fluid revealed cell count—38 polymorphs 10 % and lymphocytes 90 %, protein—1.1 gm/dl, albumin—0.7,
glucose—116, ADA 4.0, triglycerides −360 mg/dl, cholesterol—36 mg/dl, culture-sterile, KOH stain-negative, gram stain-negative. Cytology was
negative for cancer and consistent with chylothorax. CT venography chest and abdomen was done which showed hypodense filling defect in the
bilateral brachiocephalic veins, right internal jugular vein, superior vena cava and infra renal inferior vena cava suggestive of
thrombosis. Pulmonary thromboembolism was also noted. (Figs. 2, 3) mild ascites with omental thickening with diffuse wall thickening of
small bowel was noted.Fig. 2CT venography chest and abdomen showing hypodense superior vena cava and infra renal inferior vena cava
suggestive of thrombosis with mid ascites with omental thickeningFig. 3CT venography chest showing evidence of pulmonary thromboembolism and
hypodense filling defect in the bilateral brachiocephalic veins right internal jugular vein CT venography chest and abdomen showing
hypodense superior vena cava and infra renal inferior vena cava suggestive of thrombosis with mid ascites with omental thickening CT
venography chest showing evidence of pulmonary thromboembolism and hypodense filling defect in the bilateral brachiocephalic veins right
internal jugular vein In view of these findings, omental biopsies along with subdiaphragmatic lymph node biopsy were done. Histopathology
showed malignant mesothelioma with nodal metastasis. Under oncology care low dose chemotherapy including carboplatin and pemetrexed were
given. He withstood the first cycle of chemotherapy well and gradually his anasarca reduced. Daily regimen of four drugs ATT (rifampicin,
isoniazid, ethambutol and pyrazinamide) was also continued and he was discharged in a clinically stable condition with advice to follow-up
for chemotherapy. He is now on regular follow-up with medical oncologist. Tuberculosis in India is an ancient disease with reference dating
as far back as 1500 BC . There is huge burden of tuberculosis with annual mortality of more than 300,000 nationwide . Tubercular pleural
effusion, earlier thought to be a hypersensitive reaction is now being considered as a manifestation of paucibacillary mycobacterial
infection within the pleural space. With use of advanced culture media it’s possible to grow Mycobacterium tuberculosis from pleural fluid
or tissue in approx 70 % of cases . Microscopy for AFB in the pleural fluid can identify M. tuberculosis in fewer than 10 % of cases. The
exception to this is patients with HIV and tuberculous empyema, where yields may be higher (>20 %). Our patient was HIV negative and had
empyema which was positive for AFB from a revised national tuberculosis control program accredited laboratory. Venous thrombosis is a rare
complication which has been reported in 1.5–3.4 % of TB infections. There have been isolated case reports with involvement of hepatic veins
, the vena porta, , the inferior vena cava , cerebral venous sinuses [8, 9], and the central retinal vein . Mechanism behind
hypercoagulability are decreased antithrombin lll and protein C, elevated plasma fibrinogen level, increased platelet aggregation and
reactive thrombocytosis [10, 11]. Cytokines by virtue of their proinflammatory properties make vascular initima atherogenic and promote
thrombosis. Apart from this high incidence of antiphospholipid antibodies detected in tuberculosis may also have a role . Our patient had
extrapulmonary tuberculosis with no evidence of pulmonary tuberculosis with venous thrombosis involving superior and inferior vena cava,
right internal jugular vein and bilateral brachiocephalic vein. He also developed chylothorax, ascites with omental thickening with diffuse
wall thickening of small bowel. Although these findings are consistent with tuberculosis but considered nonspecific as these may be seen in
lymphoma, various forms of peritonitis, peritoneal carcinomatosis, and peritoneal mesothelioma. Association of pleural mesothelioma and
tuberculosis has also been reported [12, 13]. Malignant mesothelioma has not been reported as a late sequelae of tuberculosis but its
association with pleural mesothelioma has been reported . Peritoneal mesothelioma is a rare, aggressive tumor with a median survival of
6–12 months. It’s seen more commonly in males, 50–69 years age group being most affected and major risk factor being exposure to crocidolite
variety of asbestos . Venous thrombosis in patients with peritoneal mesothelioma is very rare and the exact mechanism for the same is still
a mystery. Although a few rare cases of pleural mesothelioma with venous thrombosis has been reported. Association of pleural mesothelioma
and tuberculosis has also been reported. However, hypercoagulability associated with malignant disease is well recognized and causes
predominantly venous thrombosis . Usually cancer patients are prone to develop thrombosis either as paraneoplastic phenomena or due to
hypercoagulable state caused by reduced protein C, protein S, antithrombin III and increased cytokines . Our patient had peritoneal
mesothelioma on biopsy but there was no asbestos exposure. Chylous pleural discharge may be explained by tumour invasion and compression of
thoracic duct. Malignancy has been reported as the leading cause of nontraumatic chylothorax . Tuberculosis may also cause chylothorax by
enlarged lymphnodes compressing the thoracic duct. Multiple venous thromboses seen in our patient couldn’t be ascertained to a single
pathology as both mesothelioma and tuberculosis have been shown to have a causal relationship with the same. To the best of our knowledge
there are no reported cases of tuberculosis coexisting with malignant peritoneal mesothelioma leading to multiple site venous thrombosis. In
a case of tuberculosis not responding to treatment and having an uncommon presentation, possibility of underlying different pathology must
be explored. tuberculosis anti-tuberculosis therapy computed tomography intercostal drainage acid fast bacilli PK collected the data and
drafted the manuscript. KC did formatting and drafted the manuscript. PK participated in checking reference details and literature review.
SJ participated in the drafting manuscript and evaluation of data. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. Authors would like to
acknowledge contributions made by Dr. Shallu and Shradha kabra. The authors declare that they have no competing interests. All data related
to this case report are contained within the manuscript. Written consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this case report
and any accompanying images.
