Infection of cardiac implantable electronic devices is a serious cardiovascular disease and it is associated with a high mortality.
Mycobacterium species may rarely cause cardiac implantable electronic devices infection. We are reporting a case of miliary tuberculosis in
an Arab patient with dilated cardiomyopathy and a cardiac resynchronization therapy-defibrillator device that was complicated with infection
of his cardiac resynchronization therapy-defibrillator device. To our knowledge, this is the third case in the literature with such a
presentation and all patients died during the course of treatment. This underscores the importance of early diagnosis and management. We
also performed a literature review of reported cases of cardiac implantable electronic devices infection related to Mycobacterium species.
Cardiac implantable electronic devices infection due to Mycobacterium species is an uncommon but a well-known entity. Early diagnosis and
prompt management may result in a better outcome. Infection of cardiac implantable electronic devices (CIEDs) is a serious cardiovascular
disease and it is associated with a high mortality. CIEDs infection may occur as a pocket infection or as infection on the leads with
infective endocarditis. Cardiac device-related infective endocarditis (CDR-IE) may occur as a primary infection of the CIED system or as a
secondary infection as a result of hematogenous seeding during a bacteremia secondary to a distant infected focus . Mycobacterium
tuberculosis (TB) is an infection that primarily affects the lungs, but it can involve any other organs and structures such as the kidney,
spine, brain, and rarely the heart. TB disease can be fatal if not treated properly (http://www.cdc.gov). Tuberculosis endocarditis (TBE)
has been reported for many years with involvement of native or prosthetic valves mostly in cases of miliary TB . Mycobacterium species are
another uncommon but well-described pathogen in CIED infections . We are reporting a case of miliary TB in an Arab patient with dilated
cardiomyopathy and a cardiac resynchronization therapy-defibrillator (CRT-D) device. His condition was complicated with TB meningitis and a
CDR-IE with vegetations on the leads. He underwent surgical removal of the CRT-D device and leads and a gram stain of the vegetations was
positive for acid-fast bacilli (AFB). We also performed a literature review of reported cases with Mycobacterium species related CIEDs
infection. A 50-year-old male Arab patient with non-ischemic dilated cardiomyopathy, biventricular failure with left ventricular ejection
fraction (LVEF) of 20 %, moderate to severe mitral regurgitation and tricuspid regurgitation, left bundle branch block, and non-sustained
ventricular tachycardia. Cardiac catheterization did not show any significant coronary artery disease. He underwent a CRT-D device
implantation, as he was symptomatic with shortness of breath, New York Heart Association Functional Classification-II. He had no history of
diabetes mellitus, hypertension, or dyslipidemia. He was on anti-heart failure medications and was on the heart transplantation list. He
presented to the Emergency Department 8 months after CRT-D device implantation with 2 months’ history of high-grade fever, chills, rigors,
and weight loss. There was no history of concomitant respiratory, gastroenterology, cardiovascular, or neurologic localizing symptoms. There
was no history of contact with febrile or TB patients. He was seen at another medical center and started on intravenous (IV) vancomycin and
gentamicin for possible infective endocarditis involving his CRT-D device leads but with no improvement. On presentation, he was looking
chronically ill but not in acute distress. He was febrile with a temperature of 38.8 °C, but he was hemodynamically stable with a blood
pressure of 107/57 mm Hg, and heart rate of 98 beats per minute. Oxygen saturation was 92–94 % on room air. Cardiovascular exam showed a
jugular venous pressure (JVP) at 4 cm above the sternal angle; normal first and second heart sounds with a soft systolic murmur at left
lower sternal border which was reported in his previous physical exam. The device site in the left upper chest was normal. There was no
lower limb edema and no stigmata of infective endocarditis. Chest exam showed bilateral basal crepitations. Neurological exam was
unremarkable. Laboratory tests; CBC showed mild anemia, and thrombocytopenia with normal white blood count. Renal profile was normal and
hepatic profile showed mild elevation of aspartate aminotransferase (AST) and total bilirubin, and low albumin. Cardiac enzymes showed mild
elevation of Troponin T. Lactic acid was elevated. Laboratory test values are summarized in Table 1. The 12 lead electrocardiogram showed
sinus tachycardia at 106 beats per minute with atrial sensed and biventricular paced rhythm.Table 1Laboratory test results on
admissionTestPatient’s valueNormal rangeCBC WBC6.11 109/L3.90–11.00 Hb107 g/L135–180 Hct0.311 L/L0.370–0.520 PLT89 109/L155–435Renal
profile Urea5.2 mmol/L2.5–7.5 Creatinine75 umol/L64–115 e-GFR>60 mL/min/1.73 m2
>60 Potassium3.6 mmol/L3.5–5.0 Sodium124 mmol/L134–147 Chloride94 mmol/L98–111Liver function
test ALT15 U/L10–45 AST64.2 U/L10–45 Albumin25 g/L32–48 Total bilirubin29 umol/L0.0–21.0Glucose Random glucose5.60 mmol/L2.7–18.0Cardiac
enzymes CK83 U/L24–195 Troponin T0.022 ug/L0.01–0.10Others CO2 18 mmol/L22–31 Lactic acid3.93 mmol/L0.9–1.8 CBC Complete blood count; WBC
White blood cell count; Hb Hemoglobin; Hct Hematocrit; PLT Platelets; e-GFR estimated Glomerular filtration rate; CK Creatine kinase; CO 2
Carbon dioxide Laboratory test results on admission CBC Complete blood count; WBC White blood cell count; Hb Hemoglobin; Hct Hematocrit; PLT
Platelets; e-GFR estimated Glomerular filtration rate; CK Creatine kinase; CO 2 Carbon dioxide The chest X-ray showed a diffuse miliary
shadowing in both lungs suggestive of tuberculosis. There was mild ground-glass attenuation, especially in the right para-cardiac region.
The heart was normal in size with CRT-D leads in place. There was no pleural effusion seen (Fig. 1).Fig. 1Posterior anterior and lateral
chest X-ray showing diffuse miliary shadowing in both lungs (Arrows). The cardiac resynchronization therapy-defibrillator device and leads
in place Posterior anterior and lateral chest X-ray showing diffuse miliary shadowing in both lungs (Arrows). The cardiac resynchronization
therapy-defibrillator device and leads in place The high-resolution computed tomography (CT) chest was consistent with miliary TB. There was
no axillary, hilar or mediastinal lymphadenopathy (Fig. 2).Fig. 2Computed tomography (CT) chest axial plane showing diffuse randomly
distributed ground-glass nodules (blue arrows) involving bilateral lungs consistent with military tuberculosis. Implantable cardioverter
defibrillator leads seen (yellow arrows) Computed tomography (CT) chest axial plane showing diffuse randomly distributed ground-glass
nodules (blue arrows) involving bilateral lungs consistent with military tuberculosis. Implantable cardioverter defibrillator leads seen
(yellow arrows) Based on the clinical presentation, the chest X-ray and CT chest findings, he was started on first-line anti-TB therapy in
the form of rifampin 600 mg orally once daily, ethambutol 1200 mg orally once daily, pyrazinamide 2000 mg orally once daily, and isoniazid
(isonicotinylhydrazide or INH) 300 mg orally once daily, with the addition of vitamin B6 25 mg orally once daily, and prednisone 60 mg
orally once daily. The trans-thoracic echocardiogram showed moderately dilated LV with severe global hypokinesis and severely reduced
function (LVEF <25 %).The CRT-D device leads were seen in the right atrium and right ventricle. There were no obvious masses on the leads or
on any of the cardiac valves to suggest vegetations. There was mild to moderate mitral regurgitation. The right ventricular systolic
pressure was elevated at 30–40 mmHg. There was no pericardial effusion. The transesophageal echocardiogram was performed, and it showed a
mass in the superior vena cava (SVC) around the CRT-D device leads, extending into the right atrium (RA). A thin flickering structure
consistent with a remnant of a Eustachian valve or Chiari network was also noted. No masses were seen on them to suggest free moving
vegetations on other parts of the leads, but some thickening was seen on one segment of wire. It was very thin and could represent a
fibrin/fibrous tissue deposit. No masses were seen on any of the four valves. A small pericardial effusion was seen and “tissue” lines in
the visceral pericardium were seen which could be fibrin, a hematoma, or tissue related to tuberculosis pathology
(Fig. 3).Fig. 3Transesophageal echocardiogram at mid esophageal level showing mass in the right atrium attached to the lead Transesophageal
echocardiogram at mid esophageal level showing mass in the right atrium attached to the lead The blood cultures and urine culture were all
negative. The work up was negative for HACEK group (Haemophilus species, Aggregatibacter species, Cardiobacterium hominis, Eikenella
corrodens, and Kingella kingae), and other bacterial and viral infection including human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) and respiratory
viruses. Bronchoscopy and bronchoalveolar lavage were performed, and pathology examination showed a necrotizing granulomatous inflammation
and special stains for AFB were positive. The culture showed Mycobacterium tuberculosis and sensitivity came back as sensitive to all first
line anti-TB therapy. His clinical course was complicated by acute renal failure with an increase in serum creatinine to 351 μmol/L and urea
to 37 mmol/L. It was felt that the cause of his renal impairment was due to cardio-renal syndrome. It improved gradually and he did not
require hemodialysis. He also had confusion and was noted to have a tonic–clonic seizure disorder. He was intubated, put on mechanical
ventilation and started on anti-seizure treatment with IV levetiracetam (keppra) and phenytoin. Electroencephalogram showed a severe diffuse
encephalopathy with periodic epileptiform discharges and continuous slow activity, generalized (delta coma). CT brain showed a preserved
gray-white matter differentiation with no evidence of acute established territorial infarction, intra-axial or extra-axial hemorrhage,
hydrocephalus, mass effect, or midline shifting. Lumbar puncture was performed and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analysis showed a pale yellow,
slightly turbid fluid with labs of: RBC 110 (normally 0), WBC 300 × 109/L (0–5 × 106/L) with neutrophils 72, band 1, lymphocytes 22, and
monocytes 5. Glucose was 0.12 mmol/L (2.2–3.90 mmol/L), and protein 3580 mg/L (150–450 mg/L). Mycobacterium tuberculosis complex DNA was
positive and Mycobacterium tuberculosis complex was isolated from the CSF. These findings were consistent with TB meningitis. Furthermore,
he had melena with a drop in his hemoglobin to 69 g/L. He required transfusion of two units of packed red blood cells (PRBC). Upper
gastroenterology endoscopy was performed, and it revealed a duodenal ulcer, which was cauterized. His thrombocytopenia continued and
platelets dropped further to 14 × 109/L. Hematology service was involved and it was felt that his thrombocytopenia was secondary to his TB
infection. Coombs test was positive and peripheral blood smear showed no significant schistocytes making thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura
(TTP) unlikely. It was decided to remove his CRT-D device leads surgically due to the large size of the vegetations. Once he was relatively
stable he was taken to the operating room and under general anesthesia a median sternotomy was performed and he was put on cardiopulmonary
bypass machine. The RA was opened and the vegetation was noted to extend from the SVC to mid-RA (Fig. 4).Fig. 4Vegetation on the lead
Vegetation on the lead The vegetation was removed and sent for culture and sensitivity. The three leads were removed completely.
Cardiopulmonary bypass was weaned off gradually with no difficulty. The patient tolerated the procedure and was transferred to the Cardiac
Surgery Intensive Care Unit (CSICU) on inotropic support. The microbiology test of the vegetation revealed 10 colonies of Mycobacterium
tuberculosis complex. In the CSICU, he was noted to have a high-grade fever and hemodynamic instability despite maximum inotropic support.
He ultimately went into a multi-organ failure and died a few days later. We are presenting a case of miliary tuberculosis (TB) with
infective endocarditis involving cardiac resynchronization therapy device leads. We believe that this patient had a miliary TB that was
complicated by infection of the CRT-D devices leads due hematogenous spread. There was no evidence of device pocket infection and miliary TB
preceded the CDR-IE. Infection of CIEDs is a serious cardiovascular disease which is associated with a high mortality. The incidence of
CIEDs infection in a population-based study is 1.9 per 1000 device-years with a higher probability of infection after implantable
cardioverter defibrillator (ICD) compared with permanent pacemaker (PPM) implantation . The diagnosis and management of CIEDs infections are
difficult . Local device infection is defined as an infection limited to the pocket of the cardiac device and is clinically suspected in the
presence of local signs of inflammation at the generator pocket, including warm site, erythema, fluctuance, wound dehiscence, erosion,
tenderness or purulent drainage . CDR-IE is defined as infection extending to the electrode leads, cardiac valve leaflets or endocardial
surface . As stated above our patient clearly had a CDR-IE secondary to hematogenous spread of the miliary TB. Several factors have been
associated with CIED infections, which may be divided firstly into patient factors such as renal failure, corticosteroid use, congestive
heart failure, hematoma formation, diabetes mellitus, anticoagulation use, and fever within the 24 h before implantation . Secondly,
procedural factors such as the type of intervention [12, 13], device revisions, the site of intervention, the number of indwelling leads,
the use of pre-procedural temporary pacing, failure to administer perioperative antimicrobial prophylaxis , and operator experience all play
a role. Our patient had a CRT-D device with three leads which put him at higher risk for CIED infection. In terms of microbiological causes
of CDR-IE, Staphylococci especially Coagulase-Negative species (CoNS), accounts for 60–80 % of cases in most of the reported series [15,
16]. A variety of CoNS species have been described [6, 15]. Corynebacterium spp., Propionibacterium acnes, Gram-negative bacilli and Candida
spp. are rarely identified as pathogens in CIED infection [6, 15]. CIED infection due to Mycobacterium species is an uncommon but a well-
recognized entity. Review of literature showed 25 case reports of CIED related infections due to Mycobacterium species , with two different
Mycobacteria species in one patient , and three cases in one report . Tables 2 and 3 show Mycobacterial infections of implanted pacemakers
and ICDs respectively, as reported in literature. The infection was mostly pocket infection and rarely bacteremia with leads involvement.
The infection occurred between 8 days and 20 years from the last device related procedure. It occurred with both transvenous [17, 18, 20–22,
24–27, 30, 31, 33–39] and epicardial device implantations [19, 23, 28, 29, 32]. Mycobacterium tuberculosis was reported in seven cases [18,
23, 28, 31, 36] with mostly pocket infection. In the two cases with miliary TB, both patients died. The first patient died in hospital after
a prolonged admission due to renal and respiratory failure, and recurrent ventricular fibrillation . The second patient died after discharge
while awaiting re-implantation of ICD in spite of the fact he had been equipped with a LifeVest . The late presentation, severe systemic
involvement, and underlying severe heart failure were key risk factors in our patient’s ultimate outcome. Mycobacterium fortuitum was
reported in nine cases [20–22, 24, 26, 27, 30, 38, 39] with pocket infection in five cases and pocket with lead or bacteremia infection in
four cases. Mycobacterium abscessus was reported in two cases [19, 33] with pocket infection. Mycobacterium goodii was reported in two cases
[25, 29] with pocket infection plus bacteremia in the first case. Mycobacterium avium complex , and M. avium intracellulare complex in one
case causing epicardial PM and ICD pocket infection respectively. Also it was reported with M. chelonae , M. peregrinum , and M. phlei .
These organisms are commonly found in the environment and likely contaminate the device or pocket at the time of insertion or during
surgical manipulation. Reactivation of M. tuberculosis causing a CIED infection has also been identified in some of these case reports [23,
28, 31].Table 2Mycobacterial infections of implanted pacemakers as reported in literatureAuthorYearAgeGenderProcedure/Type of deviceType of
infectionTime from procedureOrganismClinical presentationManagement/OutcomeAmin et al. 199121FPM generator change at the age of 20 years (PM
at the age of 7 years)Pocket and proximal leads4 months M. avium complexFever, pain, and swelling over the implant siteDevice extracted by
thoracotomy plus antimicrobial therapy (INH, RIF, ETH for 2 weeks)Doherty et al. 199670FVVI PMPocket10 years M. tuberculosis (Miliary
TB)Purulent discharge from the pocket and pyrexial illnessDied on her 31st hospital day due to renal and respiratory failure and recurrent
VFCutay et al. 199868MCABG surgery and epicardial pacing leadsPocket and epicardial leads20 years M. abscessus Erythema and discharge from
the pocket siteDevice extracted, and antimicrobial therapy (CLR, FOX, AMK for 5 weeks). Patient died about 1 month later due to ESRDVerghese
et al. 199874MPMPocket13 days M. chelonae, and M.fortuitum Fever, pain, purulent discharge from PM siteDevice extracted, successful
eradication with antimicrobial therapy (GEN, OFX for 1 month)Sharma et al. 200562FBiventricular PMPocket and lead endocarditis
Bacteremia9 months M. fortuitum Fever, chills, and pain at PM siteDevice extracted, successful eradication with antimicrobial therapy (DOX,
CIP for 6 months)Hemmersbach-Miller et al. 200572MPM in 2005Pocket infection2 weeks1 year laterCoNS and M. fortuitum M. fortuitum
AbscessSubcutaneous nodules and chronic drainageDevice extracted, successful eradication with antimicrobial therapy (CIP then CIP, SXT and
CLR then AMK and CIP) for 6 monthsHellwig et al. 20058–Epicardial PM was implanted during CP-A anastomosis surgeryNew epicardial PM 5 weeks
laterPocket and epicardial leads11 months6 months M. tuberculosis M. tuberculosis subcutaneous abscess at PM siteFever, and inflammatory
syndromeDevice extraction, successful eradication with antimicrobial therapy (RIF, INH, ETH, and PYR 2 months then isoniazid and rifampicin
for another 7 monthsPastor et al. (Spanish) 200680MDDD-R PMPocket infection Bacteremia18 days (started 1 week before) M. fortuitum Fever,
malaise, drowsiness, and purulent dischargeDevice left in situ, successful eradication with antimicrobial therapy (CIP, CLR for 6 weeks)Toda
et al. (Japanese) 200686MGenerator change at 82 yearsPocket Bacteremia4 years M. goodii FeverDevice extraction, successful eradication with
antimicrobial therapy (INH, RIP and LVX)Giannella et al. 200784FPacemaker upgradePocket1 month M. fortuitum Heart failure, fever, pain and
erythema at PM siteDevice extraction, successful eradication with antimicrobial therapy (LVX for 3 months)Siu et al. 200778FDDD PM thenNew
DDD PM on right sidePocketEndocarditis3 months M. fortuitum Fever and erosion purulent dischargeOld and new devices extraction, successful
eradication (LVX and CLR for 6 months)Kestler et al. 200980FCABG surgery and epicardial pacing wiresPocket and leads11 months M.
tuberculosis Painful anterior epigastric massDrainage of abscess cavity and the wires were cut in the abdominal cavity (INH, RIF and ETH for
16 weeks, then INH and RFP total of 25 weeks)Marchandin et al. 200923MA mechanical double valve replacement with epicardial PMPocket
infection8-days M. goodii Fever then purulent discharge and wound dehiscenceAntimicrobial treatment (OFX and AMK then DOX) with recovery. PM
was not removedAl Soub et al. 200915FPM generator changePocket, leads and myocardiumBacteremia2 months M. fortuitum Discharge from surgical
wound site and localized erythema and feverDevice extraction, successful eradication with antimicrobial therapy (DOX, and CIP for
6 months)Kumar et al. 2014a.48b.70c.71MMFDDD PMVVI PMCRT-P(pulmonary tuberculosis 15 years back)Pocket infectionPocket
infectionPocket15 months18 months60 months M. tuberculosis M. tuberculosis M. tuberculosis Subcutaneous abscess of the PM siteSubcutaneous
abscess at the PM siteLarge lump over the pacemaker siteDevice left in situ antimicrobial therapy (INH,RIF,ETH for 3 months then INH and RIF
for another 9 months)PM pocket debridement and antimicrobialTherapy (INH, RIF, ETH and PYR for 3 months then INH and RIF for another
9 months)PM device was explanted, antimicrobialTherapy (RIF, INH, ETH and PYR) CoNS: a coagulase negative staphylococcus; CP-A:
cavopulmonary arterial anastomosis; CRT-P: cardiac resynchronization therapy-pacemaker device; ESRD: end stage renal disease; M:
Mycobacteria; PM: pacemaker; TB: Tuberculosis; VF: ventricular defibrillation Antimicrobial agents: AMK: amikacin; CIP: ciprofloxacin; CLR:
clarithromycin; DOX: doxycycline; ETH: ethambutol; IPM: imipenem; LVX: levofloxacin; LZD: linezolid; MEM: meropenem; OFX: ofloxacin; PYR:
pyrazinamide; RIF: rifampin; RFP: rifapentine; SXT: trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazoleTable 3Mycobacterial Infections of implanted cardioverter
defibrillators as reported in literatureAuthorYearAgeGenderProcedure/Type of deviceType of infectionTime from procedureOrganismClinical
presentationManagement/OutcomeKatona et al. 199231FICD, with two epicardial patches and epicardial screw-in leads1 year M. avium-
intracellularePain and swelling at the abdominal insertion site of ICDINH, RIF, and ETH and defibrillator leads were relocated to the other
side of the abdomen 28 days laterKessler et al. 200453FICDPocket2 weeks M. abscessus Tenderness and brownish odorless dischargeExtraction of
the device and CLR for 6 monthsShort et al. 200574MICDPocket6 weeks M. peregrinum Persistent erythema and a pustuleExtraction of the AICD
and the leads. CIP and CLR for 6 weeksChrissoheris et al. 200885MICD (removal of PM and ICD implantation)PocketFew days M. goodii/smegmatis
Erythema, tenderness and fluctuance at the pocket siteextraction of the AICD and the leads and SXT for 8 weeksLuckie et al. 201067MRevision
of CRT-DDisseminated TBFew months M. tuberculosis Fatigue, weight loss and anemia then pain around the ICD site, fluctuant swelling 6 months
laterThe ICD was explanted, and the patient discharged with a LifeVest and standard anti-tuberculous therapyDied at homeKarnam et al.
201173FCRT-DPocket infection1 months M. phlei serosanguinous dischargeThe device and leads were explanted and prolonged antibiotic therapy
SXT, DOX for 12 months)Yuhning et al. 201256MUpgrade to a CRT-D from PM then RA lead repositionPocket and leads8 days M. fortuitum worsening
pain and wound dehiscence and dischargeAntibacterial treatment (IPM, CLR and MOX; then MEM, LD and DOX) with device and lead extraction.
Right MCA stroke, seizures, CoNS bacteremia, acute respiratory failure, and deathShah et al. 201278FICDPocket and lead– M. fortuitum Chest
wall tenderness, fevers, chills, decreased appetite, weakness and weight lossAntibacterial treatment with device and lead extraction. (SXT
for 2 months)Present case201554MCRT-DLeads6 months M. tuberculosis Miliary TBThe device and leads were explanted and antibiotic therapy.
Died due to multi-organ failure CoNS: coagulase-negative staphylococci; CRT-D: cardiac resynchronization therapy-defibrillator device; ICD:
implantable cardioverter defibrillator; MCA: middle cerebral artery Antimicrobial agents: AMK: amikacin; CIP: ciprofloxacin; CLR:
clarithromycin; DOX: doxycycline; ETH: ethambutol; IPM: imipenem; LVX: levofloxacin; LZD: linezolid; MEM: meropenem; OFX: ofloxacin; PYR:
pyrazinamide; RIF: rifampin; RFP: rifapentine; SXT: trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole Mycobacterial infections of implanted pacemakers as
reported in literature CoNS: a coagulase negative staphylococcus; CP-A: cavopulmonary arterial anastomosis; CRT-P: cardiac resynchronization
therapy-pacemaker device; ESRD: end stage renal disease; M: Mycobacteria; PM: pacemaker; TB: Tuberculosis; VF: ventricular defibrillation
Antimicrobial agents: AMK: amikacin; CIP: ciprofloxacin; CLR: clarithromycin; DOX: doxycycline; ETH: ethambutol; IPM: imipenem; LVX:
levofloxacin; LZD: linezolid; MEM: meropenem; OFX: ofloxacin; PYR: pyrazinamide; RIF: rifampin; RFP: rifapentine; SXT: trimethoprim-
sulfamethoxazole Mycobacterial Infections of implanted cardioverter defibrillators as reported in literature CoNS: coagulase-negative
staphylococci; CRT-D: cardiac resynchronization therapy-defibrillator device; ICD: implantable cardioverter defibrillator; MCA: middle
cerebral artery Antimicrobial agents: AMK: amikacin; CIP: ciprofloxacin; CLR: clarithromycin; DOX: doxycycline; ETH: ethambutol; IPM:
imipenem; LVX: levofloxacin; LZD: linezolid; MEM: meropenem; OFX: ofloxacin; PYR: pyrazinamide; RIF: rifampin; RFP: rifapentine; SXT:
trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole The widespread use of AFB staining and mycobacterial cultures has undoubtedly increased diagnostic accuracy .
Ziehl–Neelsen staining has a sensitivity of 50–80 % while that of blood culture is approximately 98 % [41, 42]. Early identification of the
Mycobacterium species can provide predictable antimicrobial susceptibility patterns. The best chance of cure is obtained with a combination
of at least two active antimicrobials given for a minimum of 4 weeks, plus removal of the CIEDs . CIEDs infection due to Mycobacterium
species is an uncommon but a well-known entity. Early diagnosis and prompt management may result in a good outcome. In case of suspected
military TB early initiation of anti-TB therapy is recommended while awaiting culture results. celsius acid-fast bacilli aspartate
aminotransferase cardiac device-related infective endocarditis cardiac implantable electronic devices creatine kinase carbon dioxide
coagulase-negative species cardiac resynchronization therapy-defibrillator cerebrospinal fluid Cardiac Surgery Intensive Care Unit Computed
Tomography Haemophilus species, Aggregatibacter species, Cardiobacterium hominis, Eikenella corrodens, and Kingella kingae human
immunodeficiency virus implantable cardioverter defibrillator jugular venous pressure left ventricular ejection fraction Myobacterium
permanent pacemaker packed red blood cells right atrium superior vena cava tuberculosis tuberculosis endocarditis thrombotic
thrombocytopenic purpura BAG concept/design, drafting article, critical revision of article, approval of article, statistics. HEW, MAS, JA,
AAS and MH data analysis/interpretation, acquisition of data. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. The authors want to
express their appreciation to Ms. Sandra Keating and Ms. Suzanne Tobias for editing the manuscript of this research. The authors declare
that they have no competing interests. The dataset(s) supporting the conclusions of this article is (are) included within the article [and
its additional files(s)]. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient’s son for publication of this Case Report and any
accompanying images.. The study is approved by the Hospital Research Ethics Committee.
