Crohn disease has low prevalence in Sri Lanka while compared to the West, while intestinal tuberculosis is common in the region. Since
clinical, endoscopic and investigation features of Crohn disease overlap with intestinal tuberculosis, differentiating these two conditions
becomes a dilemma for the clinician in the intestinal tuberculosis endemic setting. An 18-year old Sri Lankan Muslim female presented with
chronic abdominal pain and weight loss. Colonoscopy revealed an ulcerated ileocaecal valve and a terminal ileal stricture. Biopsy confirmed
Crohn disease with no supportive features to suggest intestinal tuberculosis. Despite treatment with adequate immunosuppression she failed
to improve and underwent a limited right hemicolectomy and terminal ileal resection. Histology confirmed intestinal tuberculosis and she
made full recover with 6 months of anti-tuberculosis treatment. This case illustrates the importance of reviewing the diagnosis to include
intestinal tuberculosis in an endemic setting, when already diagnosed Crohn disease is treatment refractory. The prevalence of Crohn disease
(CD) is low in Sri Lanka compared to the West. However, Crohn disease is increasingly diagnosed in recent years . Intestinal tuberculosis
(ITB) is common in the South Asian region, but the exact prevalence is not reported from Sri Lanka. There is overlap of clinical, endoscopic
and investigation features of CD and ITB. Therefore, differentiating these two conditions is a challenge for the clinician, especially among
patients unresponsive to initial treatment (Table 1). Furthermore, treatment as for CD in the setting of missed ITB, especially with
immunosuppresses and biologics, can be life threatening.Table 1Clinical, endoscopic and radiological features which aid in differentiation
of Crohn disease from intestinal tuberculosis [2, 3]Crohn diseaseIntestinal tuberculosis Clinical Prolonged remitting and relapsing
courseContinuous disease of short durationBleeding per rectumHigh feverDiarrhoeaAscitesPerianal diseaseIntestinal fistulaeExtra-intestinal
manifestations Endoscopic Longitudinal ulcersTransverse ulcersAphthous ulcersUlcer scarsCobblestone-like mucosaPatulous ileocaecal
valveIsolated terminal ileal involvement with relative caecal sparingAnorectal lesions Contrast enhanced CT Multiple levels of
involvementInvolvement of less than four segmentsSymmetric and concentric bowel wall thickeningAsymmetric bowel wall thickeningMural
stratification (target sign)Large necrotic mesenteric lymph nodesIncreased mesenteric vascular stranding (comb sign)Fibrofatty proliferation
in the mesentery (pathognomonic) Clinical, endoscopic and radiological features which aid in differentiation of Crohn disease from
intestinal tuberculosis [2, 3] An 18 year old Sri Lankan Muslim female, presented with a 9 month history of colicky right iliac fossa pain
and a 5 kg weight loss. She did not have diarrhoea, extra-intestinal manifestations of CD, and contact or past history of tuberculosis (TB).
Clinical examination was normal. Colonoscopy revealed an ulcerated ileocaecal valve and a terminal ileal stricture, while the colon itself
was macroscopically normal. Biopsy of these lesions was reported as suggestive of CD. TB polymerase chain reaction (PCR) performed on the
specimen was negative. Contrast-enhanced CT abdomen showed a segment of terminal ileum with concentric wall thickening. Mantoux test and
Quantiferon gold test for TB were negative and chest X-ray was normal. She was started on treatment for CD with a short course of oral
steroids followed by azathioprine. However, she failed to tolerate azathioprine and subsequently 6-mercaptopurine (6-MP), and therefore was
started on intravenous infliximab. Despite 3 dose of infliximab she failed to respond, and a follow up colonoscopy showed persistence of the
ileal stricture. Therefore she was referred for surgical resection of the involved ileal segment. During the laparotomy, multiple terminal
ileal and cecal strictures were noted and unexpectedly, multiple omental and peritoneal deposits were also seen. A limited right
hemicolectomy including resection of the involved terminal ileum was performed. Histology of the resected specimen showed multiple
coalescent caseating granulomata involving full thickness of the bowel wall and extending into the mesentery and pericolic fat, suggesting a
diagnosis of ITB (Figs. 1, 2). No evidence of dissemination beyond the intestine was found. She was started on anti-TB treatment (ATT), and
2 months later was free of abdominal pain and has regained 3 kg of weight. Three months after commencing ATT a repeat colonoscopy was
performed. There were no macroscopic or microscopic changes in the neo-terminal ileum or residual colon. She completed 6 months of ATT and
made a full recovery.Fig. 1Confluent granulomata within the muscularis propria with ulceration of the overlying colonic mucosa. H &
E ×40Fig. 2Confluent granulomata with central caseation H & E ×100 Confluent granulomata within the muscularis propria with ulceration of
the overlying colonic mucosa. H & E ×40 Confluent granulomata with central caseation H & E ×100 The possibilities here are that the patient
had ITB from the onset which was misdiagnosed as CD, or that the patient contracted ITB during immunosuppression with infliximab. There are
numerous case reports in the literature where ITB was misdiagnosed as CD. There are also many reports of patients on infliximab developing
TB, but none of these patients had TB isolated to the intestine. The most likely explanation in this patient is that of ITB misdiagnosed as
CD. This is given the possibility of false negative skin test and TB PCR at initial evaluation, poor response to successive
immunosuppression therapy, further worsening of bowel symptoms with infliximab therapy needing surgery and the complete resolution of
clinical and endoscopic features with a course of ATT. Histology is one of the most definitive methods of differentiation of CD from ITB.
Features described to be only found in ITB are caseating granulomata and confluent granulomata. Large numbers of granulomata (≥10 per biopsy
site), large granulomata (≥0.05 mm), ulcers lined by epithelioid histiocytes and disproportionate submucosal inflammation are other features
suggested to support ITB. Acid-fast bacilli in biopsy specimens, although very specific, are not frequently encountered . Polymerase chain
reaction of biopsy specimens for mycobacterial DNA is rapid and reliable but still has false positives and negatives. There has been
suggestion that faecal PCR is more sensitive than tissue PCR, but this needs to be investigated further . Culture for M. tuberculosis from
biopsy although definitive, is low in sensitivity (50 %) . Specimens for TB culture was not taken at colonoscopy from this patient. Although
positivity of a tuberculin skin test (TST) and interferon gamma-release assay (IGRA) is supportive of ITB, in areas with a high prevalence
of TB this may be an incidental positivity due to past TB exposure or in the case of TST also non-tuberculous mycobacteria or BCG
vaccination. Furthermore, the use of corticosteroids and immunosuppressive drugs in a patient with IBD may limit the diagnostic utility of
both these tests . When all else fail, clinicians have a tendency to treat for ITB and monitor the response. This approach is safe given the
potential for life threatening flare up of ITB, if treated as for CD in the setting of missed ITB, especially with immunosuppressive agents
and biologics. Clinical studies which have assessed this approach have suggested that a short term (2–3 month) anti-TB treatment trial
followed by re-endoscopy to look for healing may be valuable in the differential diagnosis of difficult cases . Fortunately for this patient
despite use of steroid, azathioprine, 6-MP and infliximab, there was no life threatening systemic flare up of tuberculosis. This case
illustrates the importance of reconsidering ITB in an endemic stetting, in a patient with ‘diagnosed’ CD and ITB excluded at onset, but who
fails to respond or becomes worse with immunosuppressive therapy. The reason for this may be in most instances the initial misdiagnosis of
CD and missed ITB, or less likely the development of ITB in a patient with CD while on immunosuppression. 6-mercaptopurine anti-TB treatment
Crohn disease interferon gamma-release assay intestinal TB polymerase chain reaction tuberculin skin test tuberculosis SKK and MAN drafted
the initial manuscript. AP, JHS and HJS completed a review of the literature and revised it critically for important intellectual content.
We will be accountable for all aspects of the work. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. The authors declare that they have
no competing interests. Data supporting this case report will be made available on request by the corresponding author. Written informed
consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this case report and any accompanying images.
