Dear Editor, Herein, we describe a family carrying the cis-AB04 allele through two generations; this is the first report of such a case in
the Korean population. Cis-AB is a very rare phenotype in the ABO blood group system and is characterized by the inheritance of an allele
encoding an enzyme with both A and B activity . Cis-AB red blood cells (RBCs) show various phenotypes depending on the partnering alleles,
resulting in serological discrepancies. Blood group cis-AB is relatively more common in the Korean population and is reported to be the most
common ABO subgroup in Korea . At present, nine cis-AB alleles have been identified according to the Blood Group Antigen Gene Mutation
Database. Among the cis-AB alleles, cis-AB01 is the most frequently observed allele in the Korean population and cis-AB09 has also been
reported , but reports on the other alleles are scarce. A 46-yr-old woman (II-3, Fig. 1) visited the outpatient clinic of the Korea
University Ansan Hospital for submucosal turbinectomy and septoplasty for chronic pansinusitis. Routine ABO typing of the proband's blood
revealed an ABO discrepancy. ABO genotyping using peripheral blood from the proband was performed along with serological and molecular ABO
typing of her family. RBCs of the proband showed the A2B phenotype, characterized by 4+ agglutination with anti-A, anti-B, and anti-AB
antisera, no agglutination with anti-A1 lectin, and an almost undetectable signal with anti-H antiserum. In the proband's serum, only traces
of anti-A antibodies were found. She had negative results of irregular antibody screening. The RBCs of the proband's sister (II-2), nephew
(III-1), and daughter (III-4) also showed the A2B phenotype. For ABO genotyping, genomic DNA was extracted by using a DNA Extraction Kit
(Qiagen Inc., Chatsworth, CA, USA) from peripheral blood. DNA fragments covering exons 6 and 7 of the ABO gene were amplified as previously
described by using a GeneAmp PCR System 9700 (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, USA). The amplified PCR products were digested with
restriction enzymes KpnI and AluI and fractionated by electrophoretic separation on agarose gels. Direct sequencing of the PCR product was
carried out by using previously described methods on an ABI 3130 Genetic Analyzer (Applied Biosystems), and the data were analyzed in the
SEQUENCHER software (Gene Codes Corp., Ann Arbor, MI, USA) v.4.9. Direct sequencing of ABO exons 6 and 7 from the clones of the proband
showed the c.796C>A substitution (p.Met266Leu) based on allele ABO*A102 and confirmed the presence of cis-AB04 (Fig. 2). The other allele
corresponded to ABO*B101. Pedigree analysis revealed that three siblings (II-2, II-5, and II-7), the daughter (III-4), and two nephews
(III-1, III-5) of the proband also carried the cis-AB04 allele (Fig. 2). Allele cis-AB04 was first reported by two separate Taiwanese groups
. This allele is similar to allele A102 bearing the 796C>A substitution, which causes the Leu266Met mutation. The A102 allele is common
among Asians and differs from the A101 allele by one nucleotide polymorphism, 467C>T (Pro-156Leu) and this amino acid substitution is
unlikely to be deleterious to the activity of glycosyltransferase A (GTA) encoded by A102. On the other hand, amino acid residue 266 is
known to be one of two critical positions determining A and B transferase specificity via complementary stereochemical relations between the
side chains of these amino acid residues and the size of the donor sugar . Phenotype cis-AB may be affected by a coinherited allele. In our
case, cis-AB04 that was inherited with an O01 or O04 allele, A101 allele, and B101 allele yielded phenotypes A2B, AB, and A2B, respectively.
Other authors reported cis-AB04 in combination with O alleles and B101 resulting in the A2B phenotype, which matches our case . In reverse
grouping, there was one report describing the presence of an anti-A1 antibody of varying strength , and our results also showed the presence
of a weak anti-A antibody in the proband and her family. Transfusion for a patient with allele cis-AB04 can be challenging because blood
type ABO can be misclassified. When blood type cis-AB04 is confirmed, theoretically, blood type O or B RBCs can be transfused, considering
the presence of anti-A in serological tests of previously reported cases and our case. For platelet and fresh frozen plasma transfusion,
blood type AB should be considered. This case suggests that the possibility of cis-AB04 should be considered when diagnosing blood group
cis-AB in the Korean population. Authors' Disclosures of Potential Conflicts of Interest: No potential conflicts of interest relevant to
this article were reported.
