Chronic cutaneous lupus erythematosus in a linear configuration is rare, particularly in children, demonstrating similar incidence in both
genders, no photo-sensitivity and lower probability of progression to systemic disease. We describe the case of a 9-year-old girl who
presented erythematous papules with central atrophy on the upper and lower right limbs, asymptomatic and following the lines of Blaschko,
since age four. Histological examination showed atrophy of the epidermis with aggression from epidermal-dermal interface and periadnexal and
perivascular lymphocytic inflammatory infiltrate. Laboratory tests showed ANA in a titer of 1:320, in a dense and fine speckled pattern. Due
to the rarity of presentation and location of the disease, this case is reported here. Cutaneous lupus erythematosus in a linear
configuration is rare, especially in children. Less than 2% of cases appear before age 10.1 It affects equally both genders, shows no
photosensitivity and less probability of evolution to systemic disease.2 The term linear cutaneous lupus erythematosus (LCLE) is currently
employed since clinical lesions lack the classic discoid shape.3 Such linear configuration follows the lines of Blaschko, which were
described for the first time in 1901 by Alfred Blaschko, who reported the presence of several linear diseases with characteristic
disposition.4 We describe a 9-year-old patient with, papular and erythematous lesions with central atrophy on the upper and lower right
limbs, asymptomatic, and following the lines of Blaschko. We highlight the unusual clinical presentation of this disorder. Female patient,
9-year-old, phototype IV, presented a history of onset of papular and erythematous cutaneous lesions, some violaceous, with central atrophy
and asymptomatic, since age 4. Such lesions had a linear appearance, following the lines of Blaschko, on the upper and lower right limbs
(Figures 1 - 4). There were no reports of similar cases in the family or history of trauma or photosensitivity. Figure 1 Erythematous
brownish papules with central atrophy, following the lines of Blaschko, on the upper right limb Erythematous brownish papules with central
atrophy, following the lines of Blaschko, on the upper right limb Figure 4 Erythematous purplish papules presenting central atrophy, on the
side of right thigh Erythematous purplish papules presenting central atrophy, on the side of right thigh A biopsy revealed atrophy of the
epidermis, with aggression of epidermal-dermal interface and periadnexal and perivascular lymphocytic inflammatory infiltrate (Figure 5).
Additionally, PAS staining showed thickening and irregularities of the basement membrane (Figure 6). ANA was postive (1:320, dense fine
speckled pattern) and other laboratory test did not show systemic involvement. Figure 5 Epidermal atrophy, perivascular and periadnexal
dermal inflammatory infiltrate, and vacuolization of basal layer (aggression of epidermal-dermal interface) (HE, 40x) Epidermal atrophy,
perivascular and periadnexal dermal inflammatory infiltrate, and vacuolization of basal layer (aggression of epidermal-dermal interface)
(HE, 40x) Figure 6 Basal layer thickening (PAS, 400x) Basal layer thickening (PAS, 400x) Treatment with hydroxychloroquine (150 mg/day) was
instituted with gradual remission. No relapse was observed within a one-year follow-up. Cutaneous lupus erythematosus has many clinical
presentations, divided in acute, subacute and chronic. Its linear presentation is very uncommon (than 20 cases described), especially when
the most involved site - the face - is not affected.5 The origin of the lines of Blaschko remains controversial, with two theories
explaining the pathogenesis. According to the first one, these lines may be the result of a mosaicism of cutaneous cells, in which there
would be two or more distinct cell populations, originated from a genetically homogeneous zygote, arising from a somatic mutation,
functional disparity of the X chromosome or gonadal genetic mutation. The second theory proposes that the lines of Blaschko result from an
isolated cutaneous segmentary growth.6 Several inflammatory dermatoses follow the lines of Blaschko or present linear configurations. It is
necessary to perform a differential diagnosis between LCLE and striated lichen, psoriasis, morphea, lichen planus and especially lichen
sclerosus and atrophic.7 The majority of patients described in the literature developed the disease during childhood, with an average age of
15.8 (ranging from 3 to 42 years) and an average of one year and a half between the onset of lesions and diagnosis. There were lesions that
followed the lines of Blaschko in all patients, and they could be seen mainly on the face and neck, demonstrating the most typical
presentation of the disease. The involvement of members and body was uncommon and, in the majority of cases, only a single anatomical site
was affected.8 All published cases presented histological confirmation of lesions. In cases in which the histological diagnosis is unclear,
direct immunofluorescence is recommended, in which granular deposits of IgM, IgG and IgA and complement in the dermo-epidermal junction zone
and around dermal vessels can be observed. Such procedure is not mandatory for confirmation of the disease.9 LCLE in childhood presents less
probability of evolving to systemic disease. In published studies, few patients presented positive ANA, in low titers (1:80), predominantly
in homogeneous or speckled pattern. No systemic involvement has been reported.9 Hydroxy-chloroquine, a first-line drug, promotes remission
of lesions in most cases along with a favorable safety profile. Dapsone, methotrexate, moderate to high potency topical corticosteroids and
topical calcineurin inhibitors can also be employed in patients that are unresponsive to hydroxyxchloroquine or when this drug is
contraindicated.10 The case presented shows the involvement of the limbs in two distinct anatomical sites, following the lines of Blaschko,
in a child whose age group is compatible with described cases of LCLE. Additional investigations, based on clinical (such as
photosensitivity and renal, hepatic, hematologic, neurological and inflammatory functions) and immunological criteria, yielded positive ANA
results (1:320), a dilution higher than usual for such cases. Linear lichen planus, or zosteriform, is the most important differential
diagnosis. Similar histological findings in hematoxylin-eosin staining, such as liquefaction degeneration of the basal layer and the
presence of lymphocytary infiltrate, were associated with features of LCLE such as epidermal atrophy, follicular plugging and perivascular
and periadnexal infiltrate, infrequent hypergranuloisis and fewer colloid bodies. Thickening of the basal membrane could be demonstrated by
PAS staining, providing the histological diagnosis of LCLE. The prescribed treatment was adequate to inhibit the activity of the disease,
and after its implementation there was gradual improvement of lesions. Additional medications were not introduced. The reported case
demonstrates an atypical presentation of LCLE in view of its rarity, clinical picture and topography of lesions, reasons why describing it
was considered important. Work performed at Instituto de Medicina Integral Professor Fernando Figueira (Imip) - Recife (PE), Brazil.
Financial Support: None. Conflict of interest: None. Erythematous papules on the back of right hand Erythematous purplish papules with
central atrophy, following the lines of Blaschko, on the lower right limb
