Pancreatic carcinoma is a highly lethal malignancy. Common presenting features of pancreatic cancer include anorexia, asthenia, weight loss,
pain, and obstructive jaundice. Nevertheless, fever as a symptom, or even primary manifestation of pancreatic cancer is rather rare. Here,
we report a 63-year-old male patient presenting with daily fevers, night sweats, and fatigue of 2-month duration. Laboratory findings showed
elevated white blood cell count (WBC), erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR), and serum C-reactive protein (CRP). A computed tomography scan
demonstrated a tumor between the duodenum and pancreatic head. Chest radiograph was normal. The patient underwent an uneventful tumor
resection. Histological examination of a surgical specimen demonstrated an undifferentiated adenocarcinoma originated from pancreatic head.
The tumor was compatible with TNM stage IIA (T3N0M0). Complete resolution of the fever was achieved on post-operative day 4 and no
recurrence of the tumor or neoplastic fever happen during the 39-month follow-up. Pancreatic adenocarcinoma could manifest as neoplastic
fever at the time of diagnosis. If the tumor is resectable, surgical resection is a safe and curative form of therapy not only for the fever
but also for the original carcinoma. Pancreatic carcinoma is a highly lethal malignancy and over 90% of pancreatic cancers are ductal
adenocarcinomas of the exocrine pancreas. These tumors occur twice as frequently in the pancreatic head compared with the rest of the organ.
Common presenting features of pancreatic cancer include anorexia, asthenia, weight loss, pain, and obstructive jaundice. Patients with
jaundice tend to be diagnosed at an earlier stage of the disease. Other symptoms tend to be more insidious; therefore, in the absence of
jaundice, the interval between onset and diagnosis can be prolonged. Nevertheless, fever as a symptom, or even primary manifestation of
pancreatic cancer is rather rare. Infection is the most frequent (67%) etiology of fever in cancer patients, while neoplastic fever, which
is caused by the tumor itself or its invasive procedure, accounts for 27% of the non-infectious febrile episodes. Some different tumors that
initially manifest themselves as neoplastic fever have been reported, such as hematological malignancies, colon cancer, renal cell
carcinoma, and cholangiocarcinoma. However, pancreatic cancer is scarcely associated with neoplastic fever. The diagnosis of neoplastic
fever can be made only after excluding identifiable etiologies; therefore, fever in cancer patients usually poses a diagnostic dilemma.
Herein, we describe an unusual case of nonmetastatic pancreatic carcinoma, which primarily manifested as fever of unknown origin (FUO). The
ethics committee of Peking Union Medical College Hospital approved of this study. A 63-year-old man was referred to our hospital presenting
daily fevers, night sweats, anorexia, and fatigue for the previous 2 months along with weight loss of 5 kg. He denied chills, abdominal
pain, diarrhea, and arthralgias. A detailed physical examination revealed a diaphoretic, well-nourished man with an elevated temperature
(38 °C) but no sign of jaundice or rash. The patient had a history of left Achilles tendon rupture and underwent a curative operation 47
years ago, and a history of smoking for 45 years, consuming 6 cigarettes per day averagely. An extensive outpatient and inpatient diagnostic
workup was initiated. The white blood cell count (WBC) was elevated (13 × 109/L), and urinalysis, routine stool, and stool occult blood test
were negative. The levels of serum C-reactive protein (CRP) and erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) were remarkably elevated (173 mg/L and
118 mm/h, respectively), but the level of serum procalcitonin was normal (0.11 ng/mL). Repeated cultures of blood and sputum were negative,
and serologies for mycoplasma pneumonia, chlamydia pneumonia, brucellosis, and tuberculosis were unrevealed. Further laboratory examinations
including anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies, anti-nuclear antibodies, and anti-extractable nuclear antigen antibodies were negative.
Chest radiograph was normal. Abdominal ultrasonography indicated multiple gallstones and a mass on the right side of superior mesenteric
vein. A computed tomography scan revealed a tumor (5.5 × 3.3 × 3.2 cm) between the duodenum and pancreatic head with visibly enlarged
retroperitoneal lymph nodes (Fig. 1A). Positron emission tomography-computed tomography (PET-CT) demonstrated that the mass and swollen
lymph nodes had significantly elevated standard uptake value (SUV), indicating a malignant lesion accompanied with lymphatic-metastasis
(Fig. 1B). Biopsy samples obtained with endoscopic ultrasonography indicated malignant cells, which further supported the diagnosis of
poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma based on the results of immunohistochemical staining: CA125 (+), CA199 (−), CD56 (−), CDX2 (−), CEA
(−), CK19 (+), CK7 (+), CgA (−), Ki-67 (+, 10%), Syn (−), Vim (−), and β-catenin (+). (A) Abdominal CT scan revealed a tumor between the
duodenum and the pancreatic head (bold arrow) and enlarged retroperitoneal lymph nodes (thin arrow). (B) PET-CT revealed the mass (bold
arrow) and enlarged lymph nodes (thin arrow) to have significantly elevated standard uptake value (SUV). (C) Temperature decreased to below
37.6 °C for 2 days before the surgery due to the therapy with loxoprofen, and complete resolution occurred on postoperative day 4. CT =
computed tomography, PET-CT = positron emission tomography-computed tomography. The case was discussed at a multidisciplinary team meeting.
Empirical antibiotics were administrated for over 7 days for suspected sepsis, but failed to elicit a response. The tumor in the
pancreaticoduodenal region was the likely cause of the fever. To alleviate morbidity resulting from the fever, the patient was treated with
loxoprofen 30 mg q.d. for 5 days before operation (Fig. 1C). The body temperature decreased to below 37.6 °C for 2 days. Then,
pancreaticoduodenectomy and lymphadenectomy were performed on this patient. Loxoprofen administration was stopped immediately after the
surgical resection. Interestingly, complete resolution of the fever was achieved on postoperative day 4 (Fig. 1C), and the WBC normalized on
postoperative day 5. This strongly corroborates a diagnosis of neoplastic fever. Histopathologic examination of the resected specimen
revealed a mass (4.5 × 2.9 × 4.0 cm) originating from the pancreatic head (Fig. 2A), which was diagnosed as undifferentiated adenocarcinoma
involving the duodenum and peripancreatic tissue. A large number of lymphocytes infiltrate the tumor diffusely (Fig. 2B) and infiltration of
multiple clusters of polymorphonuclear leukocytes (PMNs) was visible within the tumor (Fig. 2C). All margins of the tumor including the
retroperitoneal margin were negative. Thirty-three resected lymph nodes were not involved but some were categorized as reactive hyperplasia.
The tumor was compatible with TNM stage IIA (T3N0M0). (A) Pathological examination of the resected specimen revealed a mass
(4.5 × 2.9 × 4.0 cm) originating from pancreatic head and was later diagnosed as undifferentiated adenocarcinoma. (B) A large number of
lymphocytes infiltrated the tumor diffusely (Hematoxylin and eosin, 100 times). (C) Infiltration of polymorphonuclear leukocytes (PMNs) were
visible within the tumor (Hematoxylin and eosin, 400 times). Subsequently, the patient received 6 courses of adjuvant chemotherapy with
gemcitabine (1000 mg/m2, 30 min intravenous infusion, at day 1, 8, and 15, repeated every 28 days) from the day after postoperative day 30.
There was no recurrence of the tumor or neoplastic fever during the 39-month follow-up. Classic FUO is defined as fever ≥38.3 °C (101 °F)
for 3 or more weeks in immunocompetent, otherwise healthy patients with no identified cause of fever after undergoing a set of obligatory
investigations. In 60% of such patients FUO is related to infection, while neoplastic fever accounts for 27% of those with non-infectious
fever. Neoplastic fever, which has been defined as fever caused by cancer itself, is a well-described entity in patients with hematological
malignancies, colon cancer, renal cell carcinoma. It is more frequently encountered in the metastatic setting, especially with metastasis to
the liver. Here, we describe an unusual case of non-metastatic pancreatic carcinoma presenting as neoplastic fever. The pathophysiological
mechanism of neoplastic fever remains uncertain. One theory is that cancer cells or host cells in response to tumor can produce some
pyrogenic cytokines including interleukin (IL)-1, IL-6, IL-8 tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-α, and interferon. These cytokines activate the
anterior preoptic nuclei of the hypothalamus and raise the set point for body temperature through the induction of prostaglandin E2. The
pathological examination of our patient showed an undifferentiated carcinoma infiltrated by a large number of lymphocytes and multiple
clusters of PMNs. The enlarged draining lymph nodes were diagnosed as reactive hyperplasia. These dramatically increased lymphocytes and
PMNs may result in neoplastic fever by releasing enormous pyrogenic cytokines. Other mechanisms for neoplastic fever include tumor necrosis,
release of TNF, and other pyrogens from dead tissue. The pathological examination revealed no evidence of necrosis within the tumor of our
patient. Neoplastic fever in patients with brain metastases is suspected to be one example of neurogenic fever, which has been attributed to
direct brain tissue damage and subsequent activation of phospholipase A2. However, no distant metastases had been found in our patient.
Since administrating appropriate antibiotics timely can impact the outcome of patients with specific infections significantly, it is crucial
to differentiate between infectious fever and neoplastic fever. Typically, fever due to infection is associated with chills, warmth, and
periodic sweating and is sometimes accompanied with tachycardia, hypotension, and mental status changes, particularly in gram-negative
bacteremia. However, neoplastic fever is usually characterized by a sensation of warmth and sweating but less frequently by chills,
tachycardia, and mental status changes. With regard to laboratory tests, CRP and ESR levels at admission are not clinically useful in
differentiation between neoplastic and infectious fever. Yaegashi et al found that the procalcitonin level was significantly higher in
patients with bacterial infections than patients with neoplastic fever caused by urological cancer. The naproxen test is a classic approach
to distinguish neoplastic from non-neoplastic fever. On a naproxen test, naproxen is administered, and reactions are regarded as positive if
pyrexia diminishes 24 hours after administration. Study by Tsavaris et al reported that the sensitivity and specificity of this test were
92% and 100%, respectively. Nevertheless, study from Vanderschueren demonstrated conflicting results. When the diagnosis of neoplastic fever
is established, disease-specific therapy such as operation, radiotherapy, or chemotherapy may be useful to palliate the fever. In the study
by Chawla et al, 7 of 17 (41%) patients with metastatic breast cancer responded to systematic anti-neoplastic therapy and neoplastic fever
lysed only in this group of responders. Additionally, non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs have been reported with significant efficacy in
treating neoplastic fever, including naproxen, diclofenac, indomethacin, rofecoxib, and ibuprofen. The fever of our patient responded well
to administration of loxoprofen, reinforcing the diagnosis of neoplastic fever. Nevertheless, possible gastrointestinal side effects of non-
steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs should also be considered along with the potential benefits. Furthermore, neoplastic fever will recur in
some patients if NASID is discontinued after a short-term treatment. Undifferentiated carcinoma is one of variants of pancreatic ductal
adenocarcinoma. It is divided into the following four categories: anaplastic giant cell carcinoma, sarcomatoid carcinoma, carcinosarcoma,
and undifferentiated carcinoma with osteoclast-like giant cells. In contrast to typical ductal adenocarcinoma, undifferentiated carcinomas
are poorly cohesive, cellular, and often have only scant amount of stroma. Several studies have reported that the prognosis of
undifferentiated carcinoma is extremely poor, and average survival is as short as 5 months. However, the patient with pancreatic
undifferentiated carcinoma in the present report had a favorable prognosis (has not shown evident recurrence for 39 months). This may result
from the acute manifestation of fever leading to earlier diagnosis and enormous lymphocytes and PMNs infiltration impeding the progression
of the tumor. Finally, we conclude that pancreatic adenocarcinoma can manifest as neoplastic fever at the time of diagnosis, and if the
tumor is resectable, surgical resection is a safe and curative form of therapy not only for the fever but also for the original carcinoma.
Abbreviations: ANCA = anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies, CRP = C-reactive protein, ENA = anti-extractable nuclear antigen, ESR =
erythrocyte sedimentation rate, EUS = endoscopic ultrasonography, FUO = fever of unknown origin, IL = interleukin, NSAIDs = non-steroidal
anti-inflammatory drugs, PET-CT = positron emission tomography-computed tomography, PMNs = polymorphonuclear leukocytes, SUV = standard
uptake value, TNF = tumor necrosis factor, WBC = white blood cell. NS and CX have contributed equally to the article. Consent: Written
informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this case report and accompanying images. This work was supported by
grants from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (81071898) and the Research Special Fund for Public Welfare Industry of Health:
the translational research of early diagnosis and comprehensive treatment in pancreatic cancer (201202007). The authors declare that they
have no conflicts of interest.
