Literature reports on ophthalmological manifestations related to tularemia, a zoonose caused by the bacterium Francisella tularensis,
largely refer to Parinaud’s oculoglandular syndrome, which consists of the association of conjunctivitis with preauricular lymphadenitis. In
this paper, we report a case of intraocular inflammation during tularemia infection. A 52-year-old Caucasian man was diagnosed with
unilateral uveitis. The uveitis was posterior, with a 2+ vitritis and a large yellowish lesion involving the macula with an overlying sub-
retinal detachment, extending inferiorly, and subretinal hemorrhages. Fluorescein angiography showed a late hyperfluorescence with focal
vascular leakage. Ultrasound biomicroscopy confirmed the presence of a 3.8 mm parietal granuloma with a few calcifications in the left eye.
While extensive work-up eliminated any other infectious and non-infectious etiology, tularemia was diagnosed by advanced serology consisting
of two-dimensional Western-immunoblotting. The patient, a hunter, recalled having killed rabbits in the days before the symptoms appeared.
Uveitis was rapidly controlled following treatment with doxycycline, yet three years after initiation of the treatment, the patient still
complained of loss of vision in the left eye with a central scotoma. Posterior uveitis may be an infrequent manifestation of tularemia
infection, and therefore this infection should be considered in the differential diagnosis of intraocular inflammation in areas where F.
tularensis is endemic. Tularemia is a zoonose caused by the bacterium Francisella tularensis, with most human cases being acquired after
close contact with infected wild rabbits and hares, or after being bitten by an infected tick . It presents as a local cutaneous eschar and
lymphadenitis with some patients developing systemic clinical signs including fever, rash and pneumonia . In the event of an ocular portal
of entry for F. tularensis, tularemia may present as Parinaud’s oculoglandular syndrome consisting of conjunctivitis associated with
preauricular lymphadenitis . In some patients, systemic signs and symptoms correlate with the blood-borne dissemination of the organism and
one case of “serpiginous-like choroiditis” has been described , with atypical characteristics such as peripapillary sparing. However, no
case of uveitis has been reported in the course of tularemia and this etiology is not routinely included in the standard examination of
uveitis patients. Using an “uveitis kit” aimed at screening for all infectious causes in uveitis patients , we revealed epidemiological and
serological evidence of tularemia as the cause of uveitis in one patient, whose case we describe here. In February 2008, a 52-year-old
Caucasian man presented at the ophthalmology department for the diagnosis and treatment of unilateral uveitis. His past medical history was
unremarkable until December 2007 when he presented with a 38 °C fever and headaches. The patient was a hunter living in northern France and
he recalled having killed rabbits in the days before the symptoms appeared. Biological investigations found elevated C-reactive protein
levels at 40 g/L and cerebrospinal fluid investigations eliminated meningitis. Three weeks later the patient suffered floaters and loss of
vision in the eye. Visual acuity was 20/20 in the left eye and finger counting with the right eye. Biomicroscopy disclosed a mild anterior
reaction with a few small keratic precipitates and a 1+ flare with a few cells but without any posterior synechaie. The uveitis was
posterior with a 2+ vitritis and a multifocal large yellowish choroidal infiltrate involving the macula associated with an overlying
subretinal detachment, inferior intraretinal exsudates along vessels, subretinal hemorrhages and subretinal fibrosis (Fig. 1). Fluorescein
angiography revealed early hypofluorescence of the deep infiltrate and progressive late hyperfluorescence with focal vascular leakage. Deep
hemorrhages masked fluorescence during all frames. OCT confirmed subretinal fluid, hyper-reflective fibrosis and heaped-up cells anterior to
the pigment epithelium. Ultrasound biomicroscopy confirmed the presence of a 3.8 mm Choroidal granuloma with a few calcifications in the
left eye. The initial work-up was negative and a neoplastic disease masquerading as an intraocular inflammation was excluded. After the
diagnosis was reached as reported below, the patient declared that several cases of tularemia had been diagnosed among those of his
relatives who were hunters. Uveitis was rapidly controlled after specific antibiotic therapy (doxycycline, 200 mg a day for three weeks)
with a subretinal fibrotic scar and complete resolution of subretinal fluid. Final visual acuity remained limited to counting fingers.
During telephone interview three years after starting the treatment, the patient still complained of a visual loss with central scotoma.Fig.
1 a Fundus examination of the right eye revealed a multifocal large yellowish choroidal infiltrate surrounding by hemorrhages (arrow head),
associated with an overlying subretinal detachment, and subretinal fibrosis (arrow). b Fluorescein angiography showed late hyperfluorescence
with focal vascular leakage. c OCT B scan showed choroidal infiltrates with serous retinal detachment and fibrosis (d) Ultrasound
biomicroscopy confirmed the presence of a 3.8 mm parietal granuloma with few calcifications a Fundus examination of the right eye revealed a
multifocal large yellowish choroidal infiltrate surrounding by hemorrhages (arrow head), associated with an overlying subretinal detachment,
and subretinal fibrosis (arrow). b Fluorescein angiography showed late hyperfluorescence with focal vascular leakage. c OCT B scan showed
choroidal infiltrates with serous retinal detachment and fibrosis (d) Ultrasound biomicroscopy confirmed the presence of a 3.8 mm parietal
granuloma with few calcifications An anterior chamber puncture and a serum specimen were collected as part of a “uveitis kit” for
standardized laboratory tests, as previously described . These investigations including molecular and serological searches for intracellular
bacteria comprising Rickettsia spp., Coxiella burnetii, Bartonella spp. and Tropheryma whipplei remained negative except for an indirect
immunofluorescence assay for F. tularensis which yielded IgG 400 and IgM 50. In order to further confirm the specificity of this serological
reaction, we performed two-dimensional electrophoresis (2-DE)-immunoblotting and mass spectrometry using a F. tularensis subsp. holarctica
strain URFT1 isolated in cell-culture in our laboratory as the antigen . Purified bacteria in phosphate buffered saline (PBS), supplemented
with protease inhibitors, were disrupted by sonication and clarified by centrifugation (12,000 × g, 4 °C, 10 min). Soluble proteins were
precipitated and solubilised. Iso-electro-focalization was performed according to the manufacturer’s protocol (Multiphor II, Pharmacia)
using Immobiline DryStrips (13 cm, pH 3 to 10, Amersham). After two equilibrations, the strips were embedded in 0.5 % agarose and the
proteins were resolved using 11.25 % sodium dodecylsulfate (SDS) polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE). Proteins were visualized
using silver staining and were transferred onto nitrocellulose membrane. Polyacrylamide gels were also stained with silver stain to check
the quality of migration. Blocked membranes were incubated for two hours with the patient’ serum (dilution 1:500) or with a healthy blood
donor’s serum as a negative control. Thus treated, the membranes were washed three times with PBS-Tween and incubated with peroxidase-
conjugated immunoglobulin goat anti-human antibody1:1000 (Southern Biotechnology, Birmingham, Alabama, USA) for one hour. The membrane was
then washed three times, as indicated above. Immunostained spots were visualized using a commercially available chemiluminescence kit (ECL
Western Blotting Analysis System, GE Healthcare). The membranes were then exposed to hyperfilm ECL (GE Healthcare) and subsequently
developed using an automated film processor (Hyperprocessor, GE Healthcare). For identification of proteins by matrix-assisted laser
desorption-ionisation time-of-flight mass spectrometry, spots were excised from gels and stored at −80 °C. We tested the serum of the
tularemia patient on the F. tularensis whole cell extract (separated by 2-DE using broad range IPG strips of pH 3–10). The silver stained
gel was used as a reference map and other gels were used for Western blot. The pattern of immunoreactivity of the tularemia serum revealed
81 reactive spots all identified by mass spectrometry as being specific for F. tularensis; Nine spots (11 %) were also detected by the
negative control serum and were identified as GroEL chaperone, elongation factor TU, 30S ribosomal protein S1, phosphogluconomutase,
succinate dehydrogenase, 3-oxoacyl-[acyl-carrier protein] synthase III and NADP-specific glutamate dehydrogenase. In this patient, the only
evidence gathered from a standardized laboratory procedure aimed at reaching an exhaustive diagnosis of infectious uveitis was F. tularensis
. The diagnosis was based upon an indirect immunofluorescence serology and a new generation, two-dimensional Western-blot test and mass
spectrometry analysis. We later confirmed the specificity of patient’s serum antibodies, as 89 % of peptidic spots were not detected by the
negative control and peptidic spots specifically detected by patients’ serum had previously been found in proteomic analysis of F.
tularensis . In this paper, they have been confirmed as being F. tularensis proteins. Unsurprisingly, cross-reactive proteins included
chaperone and ribosomal proteins which were already known to support a non-specific reaction in serology tests. Likewise, false positive
quantiferon results have already been reported in the course of uveitis . This report adds uveitis to the list of ophthalmologic
manifestations of tularemia. To date, Parinaud’s oculoglandular syndrome has been the only ophthalmologic complication reported in the
course of tularemia . One case of serpiginous choroiditis (a type of posterior uveitis) has also been reported. The fact that molecular
analysis did not detect the presence of F. tularensis in the ocular specimen may be due to a lack of sensitivity of the test in relation to
the small quantity of material. Alternatively, it may indicate the absence of the pathogen into the ocular specimen. Such a situation has
been well-described in Q fever uveitis, due to C. burnetii, an intracellular organism closely related to F. tularensis [8, 9]. Tularemia
should be considered in the differential diagnosis of uveitis in areas where F. tularensis is prevalent. The serum of patients presenting
with uveitis without first-line diagnosis should be tested for the presence of anti-F. tularensis antibodies. Two-dimensional
electrophoresis Polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis Phosphate buffered saline Sodium dodecylsulfate This study was financially supported by
URMITE, IHU Méditerranée Infection, Marseille, France. All the data supporting our findings is contained within the manuscript. CT, PLH and
BB were involved in managing the patient. SA performed proteomics. BB and MD conceived the study. SA, BB and MD drafted the manuscript. All
authors read, corrected and approved the final version of the paper. The authors declare that they have no competing interests. Written
informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this case report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written
consent is available for review by the Editor of this journal. Ethics Committee advice is not required for the routine medical care of
patients, including an anonymous consent report. The authors declare that they adhered to the CARE quidelines/methodology.
