Shoulder dislocation is frequently encountered by orthopedists, and closed manipulation is often sufficient to treat the injury in an acute
setting. Although most dislocations are diagnosed and managed promptly, there are rare cases that are missed or neglected, leading to a
chronically dislocated state of the joint. They are usually irreducible and cause considerable pain and functional disability in most
affected patients, prompting the need to find a surgical method to reverse the worsening conditions caused by the dislocated joint. However,
there are cases of even greater rarity in which chronic shoulder dislocations are asymptomatic with minimal functional or structural
degeneration in the joint. These patients are usually left untreated, and most show good tolerance to their condition without developing
disabling symptoms or significant functional loss over time. We report on one such patient who had a chronic shoulder dislocation for more
than 2 years without receiving treatment. Shoulder dislocation is relatively rare, but it is the most common joint to dislocate in the body
and is frequently encountered by orthopedists in an emergency setting.1) Shoulder dislocation is more frequent among young age groups who
are active in sports and daily activity, but recent changes in lifestyle and increased longevity has seen a significant rise in dislocated
joint injuries among the elderly population.2) Unlike younger patients, dislocation in this population is often caused by rather minor
injuries since with increasing age the soft tissues surrounding the joint become frail and degenerative. Making the diagnosis is not too
complicated when a patient visits with related symptoms during the acute phase, and the joint is reduced in relative ease. However, a missed
diagnosis by doctors or negligence by a patient to seek medical treatment after a trauma can lead to the exceptionally rare condition of
chronic shoulder dislocation. Although this varies according among the literature, chronic dislocation is defined as a case in which the
diagnosis was missed for several days to weeks after initial dislocation.34567) They are usually difficult to reduce in the conventional
manner, often requiring a surgical procedure in order to reduce and stabilize the joint, and a delay in making the diagnosis and treating
the condition generally leads to significant functional and structural deterioration in the patient. Chronic dislocation is mostly seen in
elderly and mentally disabled patients, and missing the diagnosis initially in young age groups is also possible when a person has multiple
traumas.147) Many look for medical assistance later in the course due to pain, deformity in appearance and disabling function in the joint.
For these patients, the pain does not subside over time, and discomfort is not diminished by physiotherapy.134) However, though it is
uncommon among chronic dislocations, there have been a few cases where this ailing condition did not incite persistent pain, creating a
further postponement in establishing the diagnosis.45) In the case described in this paper, chronic shoulder dislocation was found in a
patient after 1 year, with the affected individual experiencing little pain. This patient had not received medical treatment due to an
improvement in symptoms and function shortly after an injury. We are thus making a report about this very rare case of asymptomatic
unreduced chronic anterior shoulder dislocation found in an elderly patient along with a review of related literature. A 72-year-old male
patient visited an outpatient clinic due to the deformed appearance of his left shoulder. He suffered fall down injury about a year earlier,
and initially the patient had pain and noticed swelling in his shoulder. The patient did not seek medical care immediately after the injury,
and because the pain subsided gradually over a week, he did not consult with a physician for 1 year until he presented to Department of
Orthopedic Surgery of Wonju Severance Christian Hospital. At the time of the visit, the patient complained of some discomfort from reduced
range of motion, but he stated that it did not interfere with his daily activity. Other than a previous cerebrovascular accident and
hypertension, his medical history was unremarkable. On physical examination, prominence of the anterolateral border of the acromion and
atrophy in the deltoid muscle was observed in the left shoulder (Fig. 1). Passive forward elevation and abduction was within a normal range,
but passive external rotation and internal posterior rotation was limited to 25° and to the level of fourth lumbar vertebrae, respectively.
Active forward elevation, and abduction and external rotation, were measured to be 130° and 80°, respectively, but active internal posterior
rotation and external rotation was severely limited (Fig. 2). On simple radiography, an anteriorly dislocated humeral head was observed, and
a Hill-Sachs lesion was also evident (Fig. 3). For further evaluation, three-dimensional computed tomography (CT) was performed. The CT also
revealed an anteriorly dislocated humeral head, and the posterior portion of the head with the anterior aspect of the glenoid had formed a
false joint. Degenerative change was present within the shoulder joint, and there was a bone defect of about 30% on the glenoid surface
(Fig. 4). Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was performed to evaluate soft tissue injuries since dislocation is frequently associated with
labral and rotator cuff injuries. On MRI, there was a full thickness tear in supraspinatus and infraspinatus tendons. In addition, Hill-
Sachs lesions were confirmed (Fig. 5). At the time of initial presentation, the constant score, and the Disabilities of the Arm, Shoulder
and Hand (DASH) score, were 75 and 35, respectively. Closed reduction was attempted gently under sedation. However, chronicity of the
dislocation made closed reduction impossible, and multiple attempts had failed. The patient received an explanation regarding possible
treatment regimes for his condition, both conservative and surgical (reverse total shoulder arthroplasty). Because he did not have any
dissatisfaction in performing daily activity, the patient opted for conservative management. He was followed up regularly, and there was no
further progression of symptoms or any evidence of newly developed complications at 20 months after his initial visit. The constant and DASH
scores measured at the last follow-up were 73 and 37.5, respectively, showing minimal change from the scores measured initially. The patient
was informed about the study and provided consent for publication of this article. Managing shoulder dislocation is challenging when the
diagnosis is missed or neglected,8) and if the dislocated joint is not reduced immediately after the injury, the chance of repositioning the
joint by closed manipulation diminishes considerably over time, while complications associated with closed reduction substantially increase
due to fibrotic soft tissues. Chronic shoulder dislocation frequently occurs in elderly patients, especially in those with dementia, and it
was found in one study that most patients with chronic shoulder dislocations belonged to age groups between the sixth and ninth decades.3)
Although there have been several cases of chronic shoulder dislocation in young patients, these are very rare unless they are hospitalized
for multiple traumas and in a comatose mental status in which initial evaluation is both very limited and delayed.4) Young patients with
alcoholism or epilepsy are also more likely to come to a clinic with the presentation of chronic dislocation.167) In addition, once the
initial pain and swelling subside without significant dysfunction in the joint, patients choose not to seek medical consultation, and even
if a patient decides to visit a clinic some time after the injury, the chance of making the diagnosis is further reduced since these
symptoms and signs become less evident than immediately after the injury. At first these patients usually have minimal pain and
insignificant dysfunction, and these become unnoticed for several months to years until further deterioration of the patient's function and
symptoms trigger them to look for medical evaluation and management.1) Upon reviewing the available literature, it was found that many
terminologies and durations are used to describe chronic shoulder dislocation. Although most authors defined delayed diagnosis of shoulder
dislocation of more than 3 weeks as chronic shoulder dislocation, other authors stated cutoff points of as early as 24 hours to 1 month for
the division between acute and chronic cases.3) Furthermore, there are various nomenclatures used to describe this condition, and these
include chronic, unrecognized, missed, old unreduced, chronic unreduced, and ancient dislocations.3) Although they are different, and that
these terms may provoke some confusion among orthopedists, they are not too dissimilar to one another. However, one must be careful not to
confuse irreducibility with chronicity. To clarify various descriptions of the problem, a study proposed a simple classification.3) It
suggested that dislocations of more than 1 week old should be defined as chronic, and that these cases should be further divided into early,
late, and ancient groupings. Early chronic dislocation refers to dislocations that are found between 1 and 3 weeks after injury. Any
dislocations found between 3 and 12 weeks are termed late chronic, and ancient chronic dislocation includes all dislocations that are older
than 12 weeks. As there is a conflict about defining what chronic shoulder dislocation is, the strategy for how to manage the problem is
also controversial and remains a challenge.4) Currently, there is not an established treatment protocol, and the management methods
performed by authors in previous studies are experimental or based more on experiences rather than based on evidence. There are sporadic
publications that explain various methods for treating chronic dislocation. These methods include no treatment, closed manipulation, open
reduction with or without fixation and resection arthroplasty, and recent additions of arthroscopic reduction with repair of associated
labral and rotator cuff injuries, and joint replacement.13578) Although reduction is relatively easy in most cases of acute shoulder
dislocation, it will become nearly impossible in chronic cases to reduce a joint that has been dislocated for more than 2 weeks. One study
suggested that attempts to reduce the joint should be dropped if the dislocation has been left for more than 6 weeks.3) The reasons for the
limited chance for closed manipulation are soft tissue interposition and fibrosis, bony obstacles, or a combination of both.79) In addition
to its high failure rate, closed reduction should be performed in a gentle manner since an overly forceful maneuver can lead to
complications such as fracture and traction injury of the neurovascular structures around the joint. Sudden and aggressive efforts may
result in traction or an even worse transecting injury to these tissues.9) For elderly individuals with a chronic shoulder dislocation, the
risk for complications related with closed manipulation is even higher.8) If an attempt on closed manipulation fails or is not considered a
viable option, open reduction is the next step.4) Because extensive fibrosis is present in the shoulder joint that has been dislocated for a
long time, a meticulous release of capsule and other soft tissues is necessary to reduce the joint without tension; otherwise abnormal soft
tissue tension may have an adverse effect in maintaining the stability of the joint. In addition, the glenoid surface itself is obliterated
with scar tissue and loose bodies and must be cleared prior to reduction.1) If the reduced humeral head is stable, fixation is not required
necessarily, and stability can be preserved by positioning the arm in a sling at the side anterior and posterior to the coronal plane of the
body for anterior and posterior dislocations, respectively.16) However, chronicity of the dislocation generally demands some form of
fixation in the early postoperative phase due to the high risk of redislocation. This is a temporary application to prevent redislocation
until the soft tissues heal. Although it has been reported to be effective,568) the method causes injury to the articular surfaces of the
humeral head and glenoid. In addition, fixating the articulation may prevent the possible beneficial effects of early shoulder motion, which
improves articular cartilage nutrition.16) In recent years, advancements in surgical techniques and equipment has led to less invasiveness,
more options and better outcome in treating chronic shoulder dislocations. Upon reviewing the available related articles, it was found that
the latest articles lean more toward arthroscopic management for early chronic shoulder dislocations, and joint arthroplasty for the more
prolonged dislocations with significant structural deterioration. Arthroscopic reduction can be performed before soft tissue contractures do
not become permanently rigid.7) Indications suggested by one study comprise of intact and healthy articular cartilage, humeral head defect
of less than 20%, and presence of a loose body in the glenohumeral joint space.110) Shoulder dislocation is often associated with rotator
cuff tears, Hill-Sachs or Bankart lesions, labral avulsion or superior labral tear anterior to posterior injuries.2) The advantage of
arthroscopic management is that it allows direct access to and inspection of these intra-articular problems within the joint. In addition,
repair of labroligamentous structures through arthroscopy can give the initial stability needed to prevent postoperative subluxation or
redislocation,67) and thus it has the potential benefit of better functional outcome by allowing the possibility of early postoperative
rehabilitation. On the contrary, arthroplasty is recommended for patients with severe structural deterioration of bone and cartilage.578)
Prior to progression in shoulder arthroplasty techniques and implants, resection arthroplasty and arthrodesis had been alternative treatment
methods for such patients with extreme defects, but while pain is eliminated, function of the joint is completely lost after these
procedures.8) Thus, by replacing the joint, a patient has an opportunity to recover some function of the affected joint. One study has
suggested indications of arthroplasty that include damaged and unviable joint surfaces, a humeral head defect of more than 40% of the
articular surface, and a dislocated state of more than 6 months.1) If the dislocation has existed for more than 6 to 12 months and the
humeral head has not been in contact with the glenoid surface, subchondral bone becomes osteopenic and soft.4) There is then as considerable
risk of head collapse and flattening after reduction.1) The same study that suggested the indications for arthroplasty reported satisfactory
outcomes in 9 of their 10 patients. Whether it is chronic or not, the goals for treating shoulder dislocation is prevention of further
redislocation and recovery of an acceptable range of motion and strength of the extremity, in order to at least maintain daily activity.2)
For most of the patients with shoulder dislocations, pain and functional deficit are sufficiently significant as to interfere with the
activities of daily living. Although there have been several reports of chronic shoulder dislocations with remarkably minimal pain and
reasonably good range of motion, over time functional deficits and symptoms will eventually develop, potentially to the point of becoming
unbearable to the patient.1348) Conservative management options such as physiotherapy are not effective or may cause further damage to the
joint. Thus, an earlier operation provides a better outcome, although it was found that functional recovery was not related to the duration
of dislocation.3) In our case, after failure in attempts for closed reduction, we recommended the patient undergo reverse total shoulder
arthroplasty because the dislocation was nearly a year old, and there was evidence of arthritic change and rotator cuff injury from imaging
studies. However, to our surprise given our initial negative view on the patient's progress, follow-up at 20 months revealed that he had
been free of disabling pain and had maintained satisfactory function with negligible decline from the values measured at the initial visit.
Above all, the best treatment option for chronic shoulder dislocation is to prevent the acute dislocation from progressing into the chronic
condition in the first place by making a prompt and accurate diagnosis. It is imperative to pay more attention to patients who are at risk
of missing the diagnosis, and thorough examination should be performed when suspicion is high. Appropriate diagnostic tools for observation
of the axillary lateral view in addition to standard simple radiographic series10) are essential to confirming the diagnosis, and if
necessary CT can be considered in assisting a more accurate evaluation of the chronic dislocation. Once chronic shoulder dislocation is
diagnosed, closed reduction of the dislocation can be attempted. Although reducing the dislocation is considerably difficult and
unsuccessful in most cases, it is still recommended that reduction be performed since it still has some positive effect on function. When it
fails, open surgery is recommended, but, when choosing an operative mean, the presence of comorbidities, the patient's functional demand
prior to the injury and their expectations, must also be taken into account.278) To these patients, excessive and unnecessary treatment,
whether it is a closed or open technique, may cause harms that outweigh the benefits. There are very few cases of individuals with a
chronically dislocated shoulder remaining asymptomatic and maintaining reasonable function despite having no proper manipulative treatment;
but clinicians should be reminded that no action can be the best possible treatment in a certain number of patients. CONFLICT OF INTEREST:
No potential conflict of interest relevant to this article was reported.
