The urachus is a vestigial tubular structure that connects the urinary bladder to the allantois during early embryonic development. Urachal
carcinoma develops in the urachus, which is an embryological remnant of the urogenital sinus and allantois. The estimated annual incidence
of urachal carcinoma in the general population is 0.01% of all cancers in adults. Moreover, urachal carcinoma accounts for 0.34% to 0.7% of
all bladder carcinoma cases. And breast metastasis is extremely rarer. A 42-year-old woman was admitted to our hospital with a palpable mass
in the outer upper quadrant of the right breast, which was misinterpreted as a carcinoma that originated from the breast. Subsequently, she
underwent surgery without any further meticulous examination. Immunohistochemistry analysis revealed positivity for CK20, Villin, and CDX-2
and negativity for CK7. After further inspection, a mass was found in the bladder dome using 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission
tomography and computed tomography. The mass was surgically removed. Pathologic and immunohistochemical examination confirmed that the mass
was urachal mucinous adenocarcinoma and mucinous adenocarcinoma to the right breast. The patient has been followed up without recurrence for
8 months. The urachus is a vestigial tubular structure that connects the urinary bladder to the allantois during early embryonic
development. Urachal carcinoma develops in the urachus, which is an embryological remnant of the urogenital sinus and allantois. The
estimated annual incidence of urachal carcinoma in the general population is 0.01% of all cancers in adults. Moreover, urachal carcinoma
accounts for 0.34% to 0.7% of all bladder carcinoma cases. To date, distance metastasis has been presented in a number of organs, including
the lung, brain, omentum, liver, bone, and lymph nodes. However, in reviewing the medical literature published in English, few breast
metastasis cases have been previously reported. In the present study, we report a case of urachal mucinous adenocarcinoma with breast
metastasis. A 42-year-old woman was admitted to our hospital with a palpable mass in the upper outer quadrant of the right breast. The mass
was tough, inactive, painless, and approximately 2.0 cm in diameter. Ultrasound examination of the right breast showed an inhomogeneous low
echo. Furthermore, she had a 2-year history of urinary urgency and frequency, without hematuria, which was considered to be chronic
cystitis. However, the patient did not tell the clinician about that history when she underwent urological examination until she received
the subsequent positron emission tomography and computed tomography (PET/CT) results. In addition, we did not observe any abnormalities in
the urine analysis. Subsequently, she underwent right breast mass resection and right modified radical mastectomy. A 2.0 × 2.0 × 1.8-cm
solid lesion was found during the surgery. Intraoperative pathology revealed right breast invasive carcinoma. The postoperative course was
uneventful. Histological examination of the specimen revealed right breast mucinous adenocarcinoma (Fig. 1); the ipsilateral axillary lymph
nodes (0/23) were negative for metastatic carcinoma. Immunohistochemistry analysis showed positivity for CK20 (Fig. 2A), Villin (Fig. 2B),
and CDX-2 (Fig. 2C) and negativity for estrogen receptor (ER) (Fig. 3A), progesterone receptor (PR) (Fig. 3B), HER-2 (Fig. 3C), GCDFP-15
(Fig. 3D). Based on these findings, we considered the lesion metastatic carcinoma. Subsequently, the patient underwent gastrointestinal
examination, but a primary site was not found. Half a month after surgery, the patient was further evaluated with 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose
(FDG)-PET/CT, which revealed no obvious residual signs in the surgical area; however, there were space-occupying lesions in the bladder dome
based on the uneven increase in the 18F-FDG metabolic activity with an standard uptake value max of 3.4 (Fig. 4). As a result, considering
the imaging and immunohistochemistry analysis, the patient appeared to have urachal carcinoma involving the partial bladder wall.
Subsequently, she underwent urachal carcinoma resection with laparoscopic approach and bladder expanding excision surgery. Histology
revealed a urachal mucinous adenocarcinoma, part of the signet ring cell carcinoma, with the tumor infiltrating the muscular layer as well
as lymph node metastasis (1/2) in adipose tissue (Fig. 5). Finally, based on the imaging, pathology, and histology, the patient was
diagnosed with urachal mucinous adenocarcinoma and mucinous adenocarcinoma to the right breast. Unfortunately, the patient rejected adjuvant
therapy. The patient has been followed up without recurrence for 8 months. Histological examination of the metastatic breast carcinoma. The
tumor specimen showed invasive adenocarcinoma, scirrhous type with formation of small ducts, and the tumor cells were surrounded by
extracellular mucin (hematoxylin and eosin, ×100). Immunohistochemical findings of the metastatic breast tumor. (A) The metastatic tumor
specimen was positive expression for CK20. (B) The metastatic breast tumor specimen was positive expression for Villin. (C) The metastatic
breast tumor specimen was positive expression for CDX2. Immunohistochemical findings of the metastatic breast tumor. (A) The metastatic
tumor specimen was negative expression for estrogen receptor (ER). (B) The metastatic breast tumor specimen was negative expression for
progesterone receptor (PR). (C) The metastatic breast tumor specimen was negative expression for HER-2. (D) The metastatic breast tumor
specimen was negative expression for GCDFP-15. Coronal series showing space-occupying lesions in the dome of bladder combining with
increased 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose metabolic activity unevenly: standard uptake value max 3.4. Histological examination of urachal mucinous
adenocarcinoma. The tumor specimen was poorly differentiated groups of tumor cells, and the tumor cells were surrounded by extracellular
mucin and partial tumor cells admixed with many signet ring cells (hematoxylin and eosin, ×100). Urachal carcinoma was first described in
1863 by Hue and Jacquin in a report that was translated and summarized by Sheldon et al. It arises from the urachus, which is a vestigial
embryonic structure located in the space of Retzius, between the bladder dome and umbilicus. The majority of patients are males in their
fifth and sixth decades of life. The symptoms of urachal carcinoma commonly include hematuria, pain, umbilical discharge, and irritable
symptoms. Urachal carcinoma survival tends to be poor. Ghazizadeh et al conducted an analysis of 66 patients with known outcomes; the
overall 3- and 5-year survival rates were 13.6% and 6.0%, respectively, and the average survival of the 66 patients was 17 months. However,
Ashley et al reported a 5-year cancer-specific survival rate of 49% in 50 years of experience at the Mayo Clinic. Moreover, the 5-year
survival rate is reportedly between 16% and 45%. Possible reasons for the poor prognosis in this disease include the clinical manifestations
often appear late and result in a delay in making diagnoses that are usually performed at the progressive phase, a propensity for early
local invasion, and distant metastases. Local recurrence has been reported to occur in 50% of patients within 2 years of the original
surgery, and the bladder, pelvis, wound, and abdominal wall are the most common sites for recurrence. The most commonly reported locations
for distant metastasis are the lymph nodes, lungs, peritoneal cavity, anterior abdominal wall, liver, bone, brain, and ovaries, and the
presence of metastasis may vary in time. In addition, Giordano et al described a patient with urachal carcinoma that metastasized to the
orbit. Bastian et al reported a patient with metastasis from a urachal carcinoma appearing in the maxilla. Helpap and Wegner reported a case
of urachal carcinoma with metastasis to the mandible. We report a case of urachal adenocarcinoma that metastasized to the breast, which
indicated that urachal adenocarcinomas can metastasize to rare locations, such as the breast, maxilla, and mandible. To date, there are no
uniform criteria for making a diagnosis of urachal carcinoma, but many investigators agree with the MD Anderson Cancer Center criteria for
diagnosing urachal carcinoma. The criteria include location in the bladder dome or elsewhere in the midline of the bladder, sharp
demarcation between the tumor and normal surface epithelium, enteric type histology, absence of urothelial dysplasia, absence of cystitis
cystica or cystitis glandularis transitioning to tumor, and absence of primary adenocarcinoma in another organ. However, these criteria are
too restrictive to fulfill all prognostic criteria for a few uncommon cases. Currently, some investigators suggest 2 simpler criteria sets,
which are more closely associated with clinical practice. The first set includes a tumor in the bladder dome, a sharp demarcation between
the tumor and surface bladder epithelium, and no evidence of a primary tumor outside the bladder. The second set includes a tumor in the
bladder dome, the presence of a residual urachal, and the absence of cystitis cystica and cystitis glandularis. Pathologically, urachal
carcinomas are usually adenocarcinomas which have a signet ring component in the form of signet ring cells combined with extravasated mucin.
In addition, some urachal carcinomas have a morphology that is similar to colloid carcinomas. Other histologic types, such as sarcoma
(leiomyosarcoma, rhabdomyosarcoma, and malignant fibrous histiocytoma), small cell carcinoma, transitional cell cancer, and mixed neoplasia,
can also be found. In addition, they usually occur at the dome or anterior wall of the bladder. The most common histological type of urachal
adenocarcinoma is mucinous adenocarcinoma. However, there are some different pathological features between the urachus carcinoma specimen
and breast carcinoma specimen. The pathology of breast carcinoma shows uniform small round cell proliferation, arranged in cluster, floating
in the lake of mucus, which is separated by fibrous connective tissue. The size and shape of the cell cluster are different, such as small
tubular or papillary structure. Occasionally, cellular pleomorphism, mitotic figure, and small calcification were observed. Some cases were
papillary and solid microcatheter in composition. Mucus stain was positive for the lake of mucus, but it was negative in the cytoplasm.
Moreover, immunohistochemistry is one of the most important methods for differentiating between primary and metastatic carcinoma. According
to previous studies, Scopsi et al indicated that urachal adenocarcinomas are commonly positive for CK7, CK20, and CDX2, and they lack
nuclear positivity for β-catenin. Furthermore, Gopalan et al reported that all urachal carcinomas are diffusely and strongly positive for
CK20 and CDX-2, and approximately half of urachal carcinomas are positive for CK7. However, primary breast cancers are usually positive for
ER, PR, C-erbB2, Cyclin D1, and so on. Thus, it is easy to differentiate primary and metastatic breast carcinoma, as immunohistochemistry is
a useful tool. In the present report, immunohistochemistry analysis showed positivity for CK20, Villin, and CDX-2, and negativity for ER,
PR, HER-2, GCDFP-15, and CK7, which supported the diagnosis of urachal adenocarcinomas. PET/CT and postoperative pathology also confirmed
the immunohistochemistry results. Therefore, we should perform meticulous examination of the patient before employing the next treatment
strategy, and biopsy should be utilized to acquire a sample for pathology analysis and immunohistochemistry to confirm the disease. Unlike
other carcinomas, there is no standard treatment for urachal carcinoma. Surgical removal of urachal carcinoma is the most effective
treatment, although the standard operation method and regional lymphadenectomy approach remain to be decided. Primary treatment for
localized disease includes wide local excision of the urachus, umbilicus, and surrounding soft tissues combined with partial or radical
cystectomy and bilateral pelvic lymphadenectomy. Currently, there are several effective chemotherapy regimens for treating primary and
metastatic urachal adenocarcinoma. For instance, Jung et al reported that a 5-fluorouracil-based chemotherapy regimen could be considered
for metastatic recurrent disease. Yanagihara et al found that 5-fluorouracil, leucovorin, and oxaliplatin are effective for treating
metastatic urachal carcinoma. An additional case study from Japan describes a patient with metastatic urachal carcinoma and a history of
considerable chemotherapy whose lung lesions had a marked response to irinotecan. Furthermore, Miyata et al reported that the combination of
gemcitabine and cisplatin may be a useful option for treating urachal carcinoma, including recurrent carcinoma. There are limited studies
about radiotherapy, and it is unclear whether patients with urachal carcinoma could benefit from radiotherapy. In addition, the
aforementioned treatment outcome for urachal carcinoma is usually described in case reports. However, the number of cases is low, and there
are insufficient evidence-based indices that can guide chemotherapy. Urachal carcinoma is a very rare tumor with a poor prognosis. In a
previous study, survival was not associated with the age, gender, race, histological grade, or partial versus complete cystectomy. A study
from the Mayo clinic reported that staging with the tumor node metastasis system is a predictor of the outcome after surgery for urachal
adenocarcinoma. Moreover, Ashley et al observed that the most important prognosis were the tumor grade and surgical margin status. If the
resection margin alone is clear, another important prognostic factor is tumor staging. Kim et al found evidence that the Mayo staging system
might be more effective than the Sheldon staging system. They also suggested that the tumor size might be a prognostic factor for urachal
carcinoma. Urachal carcinoma is a rare tumor that can metastasize to rare locations, such as in this case study of metastasis to the breast.
Some rare metastatic locations are usually ignored by clinicians, resulting in misdiagnosis. Pathological and immunohistochemical
examination are essential for differentiating between urachal carcinoma and other primary carcinomas. Based on this concept, clinicians must
be aware of the importance of pathology and immunohistochemistry and thus perform meticulous inspections for patients before treatment to
avoid misdiagnosis. Moreover, there is no standard treatment for urachal carcinoma, but surgery is the main treatment of choice.
Chemotherapy for urachal carcinoma should be evaluated in further research. Abbreviations: CT = computed tomography, FDG =
fluorodeoxyglucose, PET = positron emission tomography. Xiang-Rong Zhao and Chao Gao contributed equally to this work. Financial and
competing interest disclosure: The authors have no relevant affiliations or financial involvements with any organization or entities that
have a financial interest in or conflict with the subject matter or materials discussed in the manuscript. This manuscript was drafted
without writing assistance. Informed consent disclosure: The patient gave consent for publication of the present case report. The authors
have no conflicts of interest to disclose.
