Supplemental Digital Content is available in the text Cryptococcal meningitis is an uncommon but severe complication of sarcoidosis. We
present 2 patients with cryptococcal meningitis complicating sarcoidosis and compared findings with 38 cases reported in the literature.
When analyzing our patients and 38 cases reported in the literature, we found that median age of sarcoidosis patients with cryptococcal
meningitis was 39 years (range 30–48); 27 of 33 reported cases (82%) had a history of sarcoidosis. Only 16 of 40 patients (40%) received
immunomodulating therapy at the time of diagnosis of cryptococcal meningitis. The diagnosis of cryptococcal meningitis was delayed in 17 of
40 patients (43%), mainly because of the initial suspicion of neurosarcoidosis. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) examination showed mildly elevated
white blood cell count (range 23–129/mm3). Twenty-nine of 32 cases (91%) had a positive CSF culture for Cryptococcus neoformans and 25 of 27
cases (93%) had a positive CSF C neoformans antigen test. CD4 counts were low in all patients in whom counts were performed (84–228/mL).
Twelve patients had an unfavorable outcome (32%), of which 7 died (19%) and 24 patients (65%) had a favorable outcome. The rate of
unfavorable outcome in patients with a delayed diagnosis was 7 of 17 (41%) compared to 5 of 28 (21%) in patients in whom diagnosis was not
delayed. Cryptococcal meningitis is a rare but life-threatening complication of sarcoidosis. Patients were often initially misdiagnosed as
neurosarcoidosis, which resulted in considerable treatment delay and worse outcome. CSF cryptococcal antigen tests are advised in patients
with sarcoidosis and meningitis. Cryptococcal meningitis is an opportunistic infection caused by the encapsulated yeast Cryptococcus
neoformans. T-cell immunity is the predominant pathway for protection against cryptococcal infection, and a high incidence of cryptococcal
infection is reported in HIV-infected patients. A minority of cryptococcal meningitis cases occur in HIV-negative patients and half of these
patients have a co-existing immunocompromised state, for instance, due to glucocorticoid treatment, hematologic malignancy, or organ
transplantation. Cryptococcal meningitis is an uncommon complication of sarcoidosis. In patients with sarcoidosis T-cell-mediated immunity
has been shown to be impaired, which might be explained by a combination of sequestering of CD4-T cells in granulomas and suppression of
T-cell proliferation by regulatory CD4 T-cells causing anergy. We present 2 patients with cryptococcal meningitis complicating sarcoidosis
and performed a meta-analysis of our cases and those identified in the literature. A 32-year-old previously healthy white male presented
with a 6-month history of headache, which worsened 3 weeks before presentation. Furthermore, he suffered from malaise and weight loss. Over
the last 2 weeks, he noticed weakness of the lower limbs and in the last 2 days diplopia, dysphagia, and paresthesia of the hands. He had no
specific occupational exposure to toxins. Neurologic examination showed neck stiffness, right-sided third and sixth cranial nerve palsy, and
absent tendon reflexes. Lumbar puncture revealed an elevated opening pressure and CSF analysis showed 15 leukocytes per mm3, CSF glucose
concentration of 0.8 mmol/L, CSF protein concentration of 0.59 g/L. Cranial MRI showed no abnormalities. Tuberculous meningitis was
suspected and tuberculostatic drugs were initiated. Two days after admission the culture and antigen test of the CSF were found positive for
C neoformans; HIV serology was negative. The patient was started on amphocytericine B and flucytosine. After 3 days, he developed vision
loss and a unilateral fixed pupil, followed by a respiratory arrest. He was intubated and cranial CT was normal. Subsequently, a lumbar
puncture was performed showing an opening pressure above 50 cm water. After withdrawal of 80 mL CSF, pupillary reaction and cranial nerve
palsies improved, and he was transferred to our tertiary referral center. In our center, an external lumbar drain was placed, which was
followed by a sudden decline of consciousness (E3M3Vtube). Cranial CT showed a cerebellar hemorrhage with compression of the fourth
ventricle and hydrocephalus (Fig. 1). A permanent external ventricular catheter was placed and his neurological condition improved. Cranial
MRI showed leptomeningeal enhancement. FDG PET showed hilar and mediastinal lymphadenopathy (Fig. 2) and biopsy of a subcarinal lymph node
showed granulomatous inflammation consistent with sarcoidosis. Laboratory investigations showed a CD4-count of 130/mm3, a CD8-count of
200/mm, and an ACE concentration of 17 U/L (normal 20–70 U/L). The patient was treated with methylprednisolone (1000 mg during 3 days)
followed by prednisolone (60 mg daily). Amphocytericine B (0.7 mg/kg daily) and flucytosine (100 mg/kg daily) were continued for 6 weeks
after admission, followed by fluconazole (200 mg daily). At discharge, the patient had a severely impaired vision, a diffuse mild paresis of
the limbs, and ataxia of the lower limbs. Cranial CT of case 1 showing cerebellar hemorrhage (A) and hydrocephalus (B). CT = computed
tomography. PET-CT scan of case 1 showing hilair and mediastinal lymphadenopathy. PET-CT = Positron emission tomography–computed tomography.
A 49-year-old white woman presented with a 1 week-history of headache, nausea, and anorexia. Her medical history revealed pulmonary
sarcoidosis, for which she received no medication at presentation. She had no specific occupational exposure to toxins. Neurological
examination was normal. Because of severe persistent headache and fever, a lumbar puncture was performed showing an opening pressure of
30 cm water, 117 leukocytes per mm3, glucose concentration of 3.3 mmol/L and protein concentration of 0.36 g/L; blood and CSF culture showed
C neoformans. HIV-serology was negative and cranial MRI was normal. CD4 count was 200 cells/mm3 and CD8-count was 290/mm. Amphotericine B
and flucytosine were initiated, and a monthly lumbar puncture was performed to monitor the presence of the cryptococcal antigen. She made a
full recovery and required no treatment for sarcoidosis as she had few symptoms. In a PubMed search using the Mesh terms “Meningitis,
Cryptococcal” and “Sarcoidosis,” as well as synonyms of these terms (see Fig. 3) and Embase search using the terms “Sarcoidosis” and
“Cryptococcal meningitis,” 26 of 176 identified articles met our inclusion criteria (Fig. 3 and Supplementary Table 1). Cases were excluded
if they had a positive HIV status or immunocompromised status of other cause. Patients treated for sarcoidosis with immunomodulating therapy
were included. Articles with neither access to the abstract or full text were excluded. Studies written in English, German, French, and
Dutch were included. In a meta-analysis of clinical data, we systematically scored baseline and presenting characteristics, clinical course,
and outcome. Outcome was categorized in “favorable” (e.g., no or mild functional disability or complaints) and “unfavorable” (e.g., moderate
to severe functional disability or complaints and death). The 2 patients described in the case reports have given informed consent. Because
this article includes only case reports, approval from our ethics committee was not necessary. All studies were single case reports, except
for 1 study reporting 13 cases. Studies were performed in Europe (12), the USA (9), Canada (1), Iran (1), Australia (1), Japan (1), and
South Africa (1). Flowchart of reviewed articles for cryptococcal meningitis in sarcoidosis patients. Combining these data with our 2
patients, we found that the median age of cryptococcal meningitis patients with sarcoidosis was 39 years (range 30–48) and 28 of 38 cases
(74%) in whom sex was reported were male (see Table 1). Twenty-seven of 33 cases (82%) had a medical history of sarcoidosis before
presenting with symptoms of cryptococcal meningitis. In the remaining 6 cases, sarcoidosis and cryptococcal meningitis were diagnosed
simultaneously. In 16 of 40 patients (40%) immunomodulating therapy at the time of diagnosis was reported, consisting of prednisolone in 15
cases, hydrocortisone in 1 case, methotrexate in 1 case, and cyclophosphamide in 1 case. None of the patients using prednisolone were using
dosages exceeding 50 mg daily, and the mean dosage was 20 mg per day. Frequently involved organs in sarcoidosis were the lungs in 31 of 38
cases (82%), the skin in 5 cases (13%) and the central nervous system in 5 cases (13%). Presenting features, ancillary investigations, and
clinical course in both our patients and patients described in the literature. Presenting features were reported in 35 cases and included
headache in 16 cases (46%), fever in 22 cases (63%), neck stiffness in 20 cases (57%), and altered consciousness in 12 cases (34%). Other
frequently reported features were weight loss and nausea in 9 cases (26%), focal neurologic deficits in 8 cases (23%), and fatigue in 7
cases (20%). White blood cell count (WBC) in the CSF was reported in 12 cases and showed a median of 63 cells per mm3 (range 23–129), CSF
protein level was reported in 14 cases and showed a median of 1.5 g/L (range 0.6–3.1), and the median glucose level was 2.2 mmol/L (range
1.3–2.8, reported in 10 cases). Lumbar puncture opening pressure was reported in 8 cases and was raised in 7 of them (88%). Twenty-nine of
32 cases with available CSF culture results were positive for C neoformans (91%), 25 of 27 cases had a positive C neoformans antigen test
(93%), and India ink staining of the CSF was positive for C neoformans in 14 of 23 reported cases (61%). In 1 case both antigen and culture
were negative for C neoformans and India ink staining was the only positive test. In all cases with available test results, 1 of the 3 tests
(antigen, culture, or India ink staining) was positive for C neoformans. In 5 patients culture or antigen of C neoformans was only positive
in a repeated sample, or became positive after >1 week. Results of blood culture of C neoformans were reported in 8 cases and positive in 4
(50%) and serum antigen was reported in 20 and positive in 15 cases (75%). In 5 cases antigen for C neoformans was negative in the serum and
positive in the cerebral spinal fluid (CSF). In 20 cases, the CD4 count was reported and showed a median of 137/mm3 (range 84–228). 13 of
these patients (65%) had a CD4 count below 200/mm3. Cranial magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was reported in 13 cases and showed meningeal
enhancement in 5 cases (33%), focal abnormalities in 6 cases (33%)—consisting of ring-enhancing nodules or masses in 4 and parenchymal
lesions or masses not further specified in 2 cases—hydrocephalus in 3 cases (23%), and no abnormalities in 6 cases (46%). Cranial computed
tomography (CT) was reported in 11 cases and abnormalities consisted of cortical inflammation typical for neurosarcoidosis in 1 case (9%), a
calcified lesion in the cerebellum in 1 case (9%), hydrocephalus in 2 cases (8%), and in 8 cases (73%) no abnormalities were reported.
Pulmonary or lymph node sarcoidosis was detected by chest x-ray (22 of 26 ), chest CT (8 of 9 ) or positron emission tomography (PET)-CT (1
of 2). Sarcoidosis was histopathologically confirmed in 15 of 18 cases (83%) during life and in 3 cases at autopsy. The diagnosis of
cryptococcal meningitis was not recognized at initial presentation in 17 of 40 cases (43%). Initial diagnoses in these cases consisted of
neurosarcoidosis (n = 7), side effects of steroids (n = 1), migraine (n = 1), ocular toxoplasmosis (n = 1), tuberculous meningitis (n = 1),
cerebellar metastasis (n = 1), and an undefined psychiatric diagnosis (n = 1). Three cases were diagnosed after >2 weeks after presentation,
and in 1 case a definite diagnosis could only be made during autopsy. In 36 cases treatment measures were reported, which consisted of
amphotericin in 31 cases (86%), flucytosine in 23 cases (64%), and fluconazole in 21 cases (58%). Fifteen cases were treated with
amphotericin and flucytosine as induction therapy in the acute phase and received fluconazole as consolidation therapy. Of the 16 cases
receiving immunomodulating therapy at presentation, prednisolone was discontinued in 2 cases (13%), tapered in 2 cases (13%), and continued
in 1 case (6%), and in the remaining cases treatment for sarcoidosis was not reported. Five cases developed hydrocephalus of which 3
required a ventricular drain. Seven of 40 patients (18%) died due to cryptococcal meningitis. Four of these cases received adequate
antifungal treatment, in 1 case the diagnosis was made post-mortem, 1 case died due to a subsequent Staphylococcus aureus infection, and 1
case was reported in 1957, prior to availability of adequate antifungal treatment. Outcome could be classified as favorable (complete
recovery or mild functional disability or complaints) or unfavorable (deceased or sequelae) in 27 patients. Twenty-four patients (65%) had a
favorable outcome and 12 patients (32%) had an unfavorable outcome. Unfavorable outcome occurred in 7 of the 17 patients (41%) in whom the
diagnosis of cryptococcal meningitis was missed, versus 5 of 23 (21%) in whom the diagnosis was made shortly after admission (Fisher's exact
test P = 0.29). Cryptococcal meningitis is a rare complication of sarcoidosis. We found that 18% of reported cases die as a consequence of
the disease and in 43% of cases the diagnosis was delayed. It is important to recognize cryptococcal meningitis in sarcoidosis patients in
an early stage of disease so adequate treatment can be started. Diagnosis of cryptococcal meningitis complicating sarcoidosis is often
difficult, as clinical and diagnostic features can be nonspecific. In 18% of cases, cryptococcal meningitis was the initial presentation of
sarcoidosis. India ink staining of the CSF was negative in 39% of patients, C neoformans serum antigen was negative in 25% of cases, and in
5 patients culture or antigen of C neoformans in the CSF was positive only in a repeated sample, or became positive after >1 week. This
often resulted in initial misdiagnosis and delay of treatment. As demonstrated in our first case, differentiation between cryptococcal
meningitis and neurosarcoidosis can be challenging as both diseases can present simultaneously. They both often present with symptoms of
chronic meningitis and can be complicated by hydrocephalus. CSF abnormalities can be similar, with a mild pleiocytosis and elevated protein.
We also found that in patients previously diagnosed with neurosarcoidosis, symptoms of cryptococcal meningitis were mistakenly attributed to
a relapse of neurosarcoidosis. Presenting symptoms of fever and neck stiffness were more common in cases with cryptococcal meningitis than
in reported neurosarcoidosis cases in literature, and focal neurological deficits are more frequently reported in neurosarcoidosis. Clinical
characteristics and findings on physical examination such as the absence of fever or neck stiffness, however, do not exclude cryptococcal
meningitis, and CSF culture or antigen of C neoformans remains the only decisive differentiation between the 2 diseases. Repeated CSF
analysis may be needed to confirm the diagnosis of cryptococcal meningitis and when clinical suspicion is high, treatment for cryptococcal
meningitis should be considered pending microbiological examination. Only 40% of patients were using immunomodulating drugs at presentation,
suggesting that sarcoidosis is a risk factor for contracting cryptococcal meningitis independent of the use of these drugs. CD4 T-cell
counts were low, ranging from 84 to 228/mm3, which is the most likely cause of developing cryptococcal meningitis. CD4 lymfocytopenia is
relatively common in sarcoidosis patients, but only a small percentage of these patients have a CD4 count <200/mm3, which is reported to
correlate with disease severity and not with immunomodulation therapy. Especially in sarcoidosis patients with severe disease, control of
CD4 count in sarcoidosis patients should be considered to identify patients at risk for opportunistic infections such as cryptococcal
meningitis. Prophylactic antibiotic treatment in patients with CD4 lymphocytopenia should be considered until CD4 counts are back to normal.
This study has several limitations. Most notably we are limited by publication bias of cases with cryptococcal meningitis in sarcoidosis
patients, as for example uncomplicated cases or cases with good outcome may have been underreported. Furthermore, we are limited in our
analysis by missing data of the reported cases and heterogeneous diagnostic evaluation, year of publication, and treatment. This caused a
suboptimal comparison of cases. Importantly, the presented outcome could have been influenced by cases reported before availability of
adequate diagnostic modalities and antifungal medication. However, these limitations could not be overcome, as they are inherent to the
study design. To overcome the problem of missing data, we gave an overall of n of N (%) in presenting our results. A better overview of
clinical features and course of cryptococcal meningitis in sarcoidosis would require a prospective protocolled analysis of a large cohort of
patients. The low incidence of this rare complication, however, hinders the feasibility of such an approach. We conclude that cryptococcal
meningitis is a rare complication of sarcoidosis associated with CD4 lymphocytopenia, which is often delayed or missed. Many patients were
initially misdiagnosed as neurosarcoidosis, which caused considerable treatment delay. Therefore, CSF antigen testing for C neoformans is
indicated in patients with sarcoidosis presenting with signs of (sub)acute meningitis. Abbreviations: ACE = serum angiotensin converting
enzyme, CSF = cerebrospinal fluid, CT = computed tomography, HIV = human immunodeficiency virus, MRI = magnetic resonance imaging, PET-CT =
positron emission tomography–computed tomography, WBC = white blood cell. SEL and DF contributed equally to the study. Funding: financial
support and conflict of interest disclosure: MCB is supported by a grant from the Netherlands Organisation for Health Research and
Development (ZonMw; NWO-Veni grant 2012 ), DvdB is supported by grants from the Netherlands Organisation for Health Research and Development
(ZonMw; NWO-Vidi grant 2010 ) and the European Research Council (ERC Starting Grant 281156). The authors have no conflicts of interest to
disclose. Supplemental Digital Content is available for this article.
