Bilateral adrenal hemorrhage (BAH) is a rare complication typically seen in critically ill patients, which can lead to acute adrenal
insufficiency and death unless it is recognized promptly and treated appropriately. We describe the case of a 64-year-old man with
polycythemia vera found to be unresponsive with fever, hypotension, tachycardia, and hypoglycemia. Electrocardiogram showed ST-elevation
with elevated troponin, hemoglobin, prothrombin time, and partial thromboplastin time. He required aggressive ventilator and vasopressor
support. Despite primary coronary intervention, he remained hypotensive. Random cortisol level was low. He received stress dose
hydrocortisone with immediate hemodynamic stability. BAH was highly suspected and was confirmed by non-contrast abdominal computed
tomography. Prompt recognition and timely initiated treatment remain crucial to impact the mortality associated with acute adrenal
insufficiency. Bilateral adrenal hemorrhage (BAH) is a rare complication typically seen in critically ill patients, which can lead to acute
adrenal insufficiency and death unless it is recognized promptly and treated appropriately (1–3). A 64-year-old man with polycythemia vera
(PV) was brought to the emergency department after being found unresponsive in his apartment. He was noted to be hypotensive (72/43 mmHg),
tachycardic (115 beats/min), febrile (38.8°C), and hypoglycemic (38 mg/dL). History revealed that the patient had headache and profuse
vomiting for a few days before admission. He was a current active smoker and remote heavy alcohol user. On physical examination, he was
unresponsive but otherwise unremarkable except for a tense abdomen and poorly perfused distal lower extremities (no palpable pulses). Dry
gangrenous and ischemic changes were noted in his left toes. Electrocardiogram demonstrated an acute inferolateral ST-elevation. On initial
laboratory results (Table 1), several abnormalities were seen including leukocytosis, acute kidney injury with hyperkalemia,
hyperbilirubinemia, elevated troponin, and elevated coagulation parameters with a normal platelet count. Laboratory testing results at
admission Initial diagnosis was thought to be cardiogenic shock from myocardial infarction. The patient required mechanical ventilation,
aggressive hemodynamic support, and glucose replacement. Broad-spectrum antibiotics were initiated given the possibility of sepsis. Cardiac
catheterization showed occlusive thrombus within the left anterior descending artery, and a bare-metal stent was placed. There was no
coronary evidence of atherosclerosis. Despite primary coronary intervention, he remained hypotensive and critically ill. His random cortisol
level was 3.3 mcg/dL (7.0–25.0 mcgs/dL). Stress dose (100 mg) hydrocortisone resulted in immediate restoration of hemodynamics. Due to rapid
response to glucocorticoid, in the setting of underlying PV, BAH was suspected. Non-contrast abdominal computed tomography (CT) scan
confirmed BAH (Fig. 1). Computed tomography of abdomen demonstrating bilateral adrenal hemorrhage with right adrenal gland measuring 5.3 cm
superior to inferior ×3.4 cm transversely ×3.8 cm anterior to posterior, and the left adrenal gland measuring 6.1 cm superior to inferior
×4.3 cm transversely ×5.4 cm anterior to posterior. He had a prompt clinical and laboratory improvement. Antibiotics were stopped.
Hydrocortisone therapy was eventually weaned to replacement dose for treatment of chronic primary adrenal insufficiency. Our patient in the
setting of underlying PV presented with clinical features of coagulopathy including myocardial infarction, peripheral gangrene, and elevated
international normalized ratio (INR). Classic findings of adrenal insufficiency were seen and included: circulatory shock, hypoglycemia,
hyperkalemia, azotemia (4–6), and unexplained transaminitis (7–10). PV is a myeloproliferative disorder characterized by clonal
proliferation of hematopoietic stem cells leading to an accumulation of erythrocytes, leukocytes, and platelets within the circulation.
Thrombotic and hemorrhagic complications are major causes of morbidity and mortality in PV. Little is known about the mechanisms of
thrombogenesis in patients with PV but clinical data have related it to elevated platelet count, increased hematocrit and red blood cell
adhesiveness, leukocytosis, inflammation, and elevated JAK2V617F allele (11, 12). Coronary events are common in patients with PV accounting
for 45% of all-cause mortality. Myocardial infarction was seen in 0.9% of the patients and was due to arterial thrombosis (13). Although it
is well-known that thrombosis and hemorrhage are common features of PV, to our knowledge, there were only two reported cases connecting PV
and hemorrhage within the adrenal glands (14, 15). Gelfand (14) reported occurrence of BAH in an 85-year-old man with PV associated with
thrombocytosis who presented with syncope and abdominal tenderness. Gelfand, thus, concluded that coagulopathy is what appears to link PV
with BAH. Gonen et al. (15) described another case of BAH in a 56-year-old man with PV who presented with epigastric discomfort, nausea, and
vomiting. BAH was attributed to high thrombocyte count. Adrenal hemorrhage has a prevalence of about 1.1% based on autopsy studies (16).
With the advent of imaging technology, adrenal hemorrhage is being diagnosed with increasing frequency. Different causes of adrenal
hemorrhage are described in Table 2 (17). The pathophysiology of BAH is still unknown. However, due to particular anatomy of its vascular
supply adrenal gland is at risk of venous congestion and thrombosis. About 50 to 60 small branches from the 3 suprarenal arteries feed into
a subcapsular plexus that drains into the medullary sinusoids by few small venules forming a large central vein. The transition from artery
to capillary plexus is abrupt and constitutes a ‘vascular dam’. This complex microvascular system of the adrenal glands predispose them to
be vulnerable to thrombosis or hemorrhagic necrosis in the setting of bleeding associated with severe stress, sepsis, shock, and/or
anticoagulation of prolonged duration or to microvascular ischemia and subsequent hemorrhagic infarction in thrombotic conditions (2–4, 18,
19). Causes of adrenal hemorrhage Hormonal evidence of adrenal insufficiency and anatomic proof of hemorrhage must be available to confirm
diagnosis of BAH (2, 4, 18). Basal cortisol and Adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) levels, and a cosyntropin stimulation test can be used to
establish the diagnosis of adrenal insufficiency (20). In patients suspected of adrenal insufficiency, the recommended confirmatory test is
the corticotropin stimulation test with intravenous administration of 250 µg of cosyntropin, followed by measuring the serum cortisol value
30 or 60 min later. Peak cortisol <18 mcg/dl indicates adrenal insufficiency. If corticotropin stimulation test is not feasible, a morning
cortisol <5 mcg/dl in combination with ACTH can be used. Various imaging modalities can be used to diagnose adrenal hemorrhage –
ultrasonography, CT, and magnetic resonance imaging. Ultrasonography is the preferred imaging modality to diagnose adrenal hemorrhage in
neonates. Abdominal CT scan is the most reliable and a widely available method for demonstrating the anatomical evidence of adrenal
hemorrhage (3). Acute to sub-acute hematomas will have high attenuation, ranging from 50 to 90 Hounsfield units. CT is most useful and
easily performed in critically ill patients. MRI can be used to gauge the age of the adrenal hematoma and determine if there is any other
solid component in the hematoma that might represent an underlying adrenal tumor (21). BAH may result in complete and irreversible loss of
adrenal function, shock, and death, if treatment is delayed or if left untreated. Due to consequent gland atrophy, chronic steroid therapy
is required as a life-sustaining treatment. This case illustrates the importance of being aware of the risk factors for BAH in critically
ill patients. The presence of hypercoagulability and refractory hypotension should raise clinical suspicion of BAH. Abdominal CT scan, while
valuable in establishing diagnosis of adrenal hemorrhage, must not delay initiation of lifesaving corticosteroid therapy. The authors have
not received any funding or benefits from industry or elsewhere to conduct this study.
