Three-dimensional visualization reconstruction, the 3-D visualization model reconstructed by software using 2-D CT images, has been widely
applied in medicine; but it has rarely been applied in pancreaticoduodenectomy. Although the hepatic artery is very important for the liver,
it has to be removed when tumor invades it. Therefore, portal vein arterialization has been used in clinic as a remedial measure, but there
still is professional debate on portal vein arterialization. Here, we report 1 case that was diagnosed with poorly differentiated
adenocarcinoma of the duodenum. The tumor had large size and invaded surrounding organs and vessels. Preliminary diagnoses were poorly
differentiated adenocarcinoma of the duodenum and viral hepatitis B. Pancreaticoduodenectomy assisted by 3-D visualization reconstruction
and portal vein arterialization were performed in this case. The tumor was removed. Liver function returned to normal limits 1 week after
operation. Digital subtraction arteriography showed compensatory artery branches within the liver 1 month after operation. 3-D visualization
reconstruction can provide a reliable assistance for the accurate assessment and surgical design before pancreatoduodenectomy, and it is
certainly worth adopting portal vein arterialization when retention of hepatic artery is impossible or conventional arterial anastomosis is
required during pancreatoduodenectomy. Three-dimensional visualization reconstruction refers to 3-D visualization model reconstructed by
software using 2-D computed tomography (CT) images. The IQQA-Liver system developed by EDDA Company is currently the most popular software
for 3-D visualization, and XMQB-liver software with independent intellectual property rights has been developed by Xiamen Qiangben
Technology Co., Ltd (China). In recent years, although the 3-D visualization reconstruction technology has achieved better therapeutic
effects when being applied in liver surgery, plastic surgery, and orthopedics, it has been rarely used in pancreaticoduodenectomy. Portal
vein arterialization refers to the method of introducing arterial blood into portal veins to prevent liver damages caused by hepatic blood
flow insufficiency due to various causes. Hepatic artery is very important for the liver, but it has to be removed when tumor invades it.
Therefore, portal vein arterialization has been used in clinic as a remedial measure, but there still is professional debate on portal vein
arterialization. We report here 1 case that underwent pancreaticoduodenectomy assisted by 3-D visualization reconstruction and portal vein
arterialization. All study methods were approved by ethics committee of the Chenggong Hospital Affiliated to Xiamen University. The patient
gave written informed consent to participate in this study. One 33-year-old female patient was admitted to hospital due to repeated onsets
of right upper abdomen distension on April 4, 2015. Gastroscopy revealed a mass in duodenal bulb, histopathologic examination suggested
poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma of the duodenum, and further immunohistochemistry was recommended in other hospital. The patient has a
10-year history of viral hepatitis B, but no histories of hypertension or diabetes. Physical examinations on admission showed yellow sclera,
flat and soft abdomen, tenderness in the epigastrium below xiphoid and in the right upper abdominal quadrant without rebound tenderness and
palpable masses, and positive stomach water vibration. Liver and spleen were impalpable under ribs and there was no percussion pain in
hepatic region and both renal regions. Weak borborygmi were identified and there was no abdominal shifting dullness. Laboratory examination
indicated that total bilirubin was 98 μmol/L, direct bilirubin was 75 μmol/L, and blood routine examination and tumor-related markers were
roughly normal. CT scan showed that pylorus and duodenal bulb were thickened, and the boundary of them with hepatic portal, caput
pancreatis, choledochus, and gallbladder was obscure with slightly dilated choledochus. This suggested gastrointestinal malignancy (Fig. 1).
CT image data stored in the form of DICOM were imported into XMQB-liver system for 3-D visualization reconstruction. The results of 3-D
visualization reconstruction included the following information (Fig. 2): location – the tumor is located in the duodenal bulb and hepatic
portal, and above pancreas; relation with blood vessels – the tumor surrounds common hepatic artery, proper hepatic artery, gastroduodenal
artery, and partial portal vein; and relation with peripheral organs – the tumor completely invades the pylorus and duodenal bulb, and its
boundary with the hepatic portal, caput pancreatis, choledochus, and gallbladder is obscure. Based on the 3-D reconstruction results
combined with dynamic image and static model, we could understand the conditions that tumor invaded the caput pancreatis and it surrounded
the hepatic portal. Abdominal CT, (A) (arterial phase): the tumor invades the hepatic portal and gallbladder, and surrounds the proper
hepatic artery, right hepatic arteria, and left hepatic artery. (B) (Venous phase): the tumor surrounds the portal vein. (C) (Arterial
phase): the lower end of the tumor invades the caput pancreatis. (D) (Coronal view in arterial phase): the tumor invades the proper hepatic
artery. a: right hepatic arteria, b: enteric cavity of duodenum, c: tumor, d: proper hepatic artery, e: stomach, f: splenic artery, g:
gallbladder, h: portal vein, i: duodenal bulb, and j: pancreas. Images obtained by 3-D visualization reconstruction. (A) (Front view): the
boundary between tumor and gallbladder is obscure, the tumor surrounds the duodenum and choledochus, but the liver is not invaded by the
tumor. (B) (Dorsal view): both kidneys and stomach fail to be invaded by the tumor. (C) The caput pancreatic is severely invaded by the
tumor and the portal vein and hepatic artery are surrounded by the tumor also. (D) (Vertical view): the portal vein and hepatic artery are
surrounded by the tumor and the arrow indicates the common hepatic artery. a: stomach, b: liver, c: gallbladder, d: tumor, e: duodenum, f:
both kidneys, g: portal vein, h: abdominal aorta, and i: pancreas. Preliminary diagnoses were poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma of the
duodenum and viral hepatitis B. The surgical proposal included exploratory laparotomy and pancreaticoduodenectomy (resection of the invaded
vessels and revascularization). The operation was performed under general anesthesia on August 14, 2015. A 20 cm-midline incision was made
in the abdomen, and cholestatic liver and swollen gallbladder was seen. One hard mass (7 cm × 6 cm × 6 cm), surrounding the portal vascular
structure, could be palpable at duodenal bulb and hepatic portal; and it was not sharply demarcated form the hepatic portal. Enlarged lymph
nodes could be palpable beside greater omentum and common hepatic artery. Duodenal lateral peritoneum was opened by Kocher maneuver. After
the 2nd and 3rd segments of duodenum as well as the caput pancreatis were separated from behind the peritoneum, we saw that the caput
pancreatis was involved by the tumor. The superior mesenteric artery and superior mesenteric vein were separated along pancreatic inferior
border because they were not involved by tumor. Based on the conditions above, we decided to carry out pancreaticoduodenectomy. After the
vascular structure in the hepatoduodenal ligament, celiac trunk, common hepatic artery, and splenic artery were exposed, we found that the
proper hepatic artery and gastroduodenal artery were surrounded by tumor, and they could not be completely dissociated. Therefore, we
decided to cut off the proper hepatic artery followed by end-to-side anastomosis between the proper hepatic artery and the portal vein.
Pancreatic transection was performed through the upper and lower margins of the pancreas on the left side of superior mesenteric vein, and
then the greater and lesser gastric curvatures were separated followed by gastric amputation. After the gallbladder was removed and the
common hepatic duct was cut off; tumor removal, regional lymphadenectomy, and digestive tract reconstruction were performed (Figs. 3 and 4).
The operation lasted for 6.5 hours, and intraoperative blood loss was about 1500 mL. Pathology conformed diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (Fig.
5). Intraoperative pictures. (A) The tumor is removed and vessels are exposed. (B) The liver before portal vein arterialization. (C) Portal
vein-proper hepatic artery arterialization. (D) The liver after portal vein arterialization. a: inferior vena cava, b: portal vein, c:
proper hepatic artery, d: splenic artery, e: splenic vein, f: superior mesenteric artery, g: common hepatic duct, h: liver, i: pancreas, and
j: anastomotic stoma between portal vein and proper hepatic artery images obtained by 3-D visualization reconstruction. Excisional tumor.
Immunohistochemistory picture of the tumor indicates diffuse large B cell lymphoma. Liver function was dynamically monitored after
operation, and it returned to normal limits 1 week later (Fig. 6). One week after operation, color Doppler ultrasound showed portal vein
patency, the signal of blood stream from proper hepatic artery into portal vein, 10 cm-inner diameter of the portal vein at the hepatic
portal with a high flow velocity of 21 cm/s, and 12 cm-inner diameter at the midpiece of the portal vein with a high flow velocity of
94.8 cm/s (Fig. 7). One month after operation, color Doppler ultrasound reexamination showed portal vein patency, no marked signal of blood
stream in the proper hepatic artery, 8.5 cm-inner diameter of the portal vein at the hepatic portal with a high flow velocity of 22.52 cm/s,
and 9.9 cm-inner diameter at the midpiece of the portal vein with a high flow velocity of 50.87 cm/s (Fig. 8). Digital subtraction
arteriography was performed through the celiac trunk 1 month after operation, and it showed clear shadow of splenic artery, a compensatory
artery branch into the left liver, and no shadow in the proper hepatic artery. Therefore, proper hepatic artery embolization was not
performed (Fig. 9). Angiography of superior mesenteric artery revealed clear shadow of mesenteric vessels and a compensatory artery branch
into the right liver (Fig. 10). Angiography of abdominal aorta showed compensatory artery branches within the liver (Fig. 11). Liver
function within 1 week after operation. ALB = albumin, ALT = alanine aminotransferase, D-bil = direct bilirubin, T-bil = total bilirubin.
One week after operation, color Doppler ultrasound shows the signal of blood stream from proper hepatic artery into portal vein. a: portal
vein, b: inferior vena cava, c: blood stream from proper hepatic artery into portal vein, and d: proper hepatic artery. One month after
operation, color Doppler ultrasound shows no marked signal of blood stream in proper hepatic artery. a: portal vein, b: inferior vena cava.
Digital subtraction arteriography (DSA) performed through the celiac trunk shows a compensatory artery branch into the left liver and no
shadow in the proper hepatic artery. The arrow indicates a compensatory artery branch into the left liver. Angiography of superior
mesenteric artery shows a compensatory artery branch in the right liver. The arrow indicates a compensatory artery branch within the right
liver. Angiography of abdominal aorta shows compensatory artery branches within the liver. The arrows indicate compensatory artery branches
within the liver. Pancreaticoduodenectomy, mainly applied for surgical treatment of the tumors in caput pancreatis, is difficult with high
risks. It has been reported that the incidence of complications is 15% to 45% and perioperative fatality rate is less than 5% after
pancreaticoduodenectomy. Due to occult pathogenesy and special biological behaviors of tumors occurring in the caput pancreatic, they
readily invade surrounding blood vessels and nerves, bringing difficulties to radical resection for these tumors. Blood vessel involvement
is an important factor affecting radical resection. Therefore, it is critical to understand the tumor anatomy and evaluate resectability
before operation. Nowadays, preoperative assessment is mainly assisted by CT and MRI imaging examinations. CT examination, characterized by
its high resolution and image clarity, is capable of showing the relation between tumor and surrounding organs and vessels, thus has been
widely applied in clinic. With the development of medical imaging technology, 3-D visualization reconstruction has widely used in recent
years. The capability of 3-D visualization reconstruction, including arbitrarily rotating, zooming, combinatorially viewing, vitrification
and concealing target organ model, makes it powerful in displaying the tumor's volume and shape, anatomical relationship with organs and
vessels, and the invasion condition. Tumors and vessels cannot be stereoscopically shown in CT images, but the 3-D visualization
reconstruction can greatly make up the limitation, and can provide more reliable preoperative assessment and more effective surgical
proposal. For the tumors occurring in caput pancreatic and involving hepatic artery, it is difficult to obtain radical resection only by
classical pancreatoduodenectomy, so simultaneous removal of the hepatic artery is necessary. Because blood supply for the liver is mainly
from portal vein; if liver function is normal, liver artery ligation usually will not lead to liver ischemia or necrosis. However, in
extensive radical resection of tumor in porta hepatis, exposure of blood vessels in hepatoduodenal ligament often cut off the blood supply
of collateral circulation for the remaining liver, so hepatic artery resection may cause severe biliary tract ischemia-related complications
such as liver abscess, bilioenteric anastomotic leakage, and even hepatic failure. Based on the reduction of liver blood perfusion and
increased incidence of hepatic encephalopathy after portacaval shunt for the treatment of portal hypertension, Cohn (1952) and Fisher (1954)
conceived the idea of liver perfusion using arterial blood instead of portal vein blood. Portal vein arterialization could be performed by
multiple ways such as complete or partial portal vein arterialization, direct or bridging anastomosis. The blood supply could be from
hepatic artery, right renal artery, splenic artery and right gastric artery, etc. Portal vein arterialization could effectively improve
liver function, promote hepatic cell regeneration, prevent hepatic failure, and reduce biliary tract complications. One case had acute
hepatic failure and was not suitable for liver transplantation, this patient tried to receive portal vein arterialization and finally this
patient was discharged from hospital because his liver function gradually recovered after operation. Tsivian et al performed a systematic
review for literatures and found that portal vein arterialization was safe and reliable in prevention and treatment for acute liver failure.
Portal vein arterialization can benefit liver in a short time. However, it may also induce some adverse side effects such as increased
portal vein pressure, hepatic cell apoptosis, and reduced hepatotrophic factors. To reduce the adverse side effects caused by portal vein
arterialization, Bonnet et al adopted the method to limit portal vein flow, and Kondo et al carried out anastomotic embolism after portal
hypertension and collateral circulation were observed by angiography. Therefore, limiting blood flow and anastomotic embolism are the main
methods to reduce or avoid the adverse side effects caused by portal vein arterialization. Chen et al believe that it is reasonable to block
arterialization 1 to 6 months after operation. Because the patient in this study had a 10-year medical history of viral hepatitis B and
increased total bilirubin level before operation, and exposure of blood vessels in the hepatoduodenal ligament led to loss of hepatic blood
supply from hepatic artery and most collateral circulation; complications such as liver damage, bilioenteric anastomotic leakage, liver
abscess, and even liver failure would readily occur. Therefore, we adopted the anastomosis between portal vein and proper hepatic artery to
increase portal vein blood flow and promote liver function recovery. Six days after operation, the liver function returned to normal limits,
and no biliary tract complications occurred. To avoid side effects such as portal hypertension induce by long-term portal vein
arterialization, proper hepatic artery embolism was planned. Digital subtraction arteriography angiography revealed anastomotic occlusion of
portal vein arterialization and formation of liver compensatory arterial branches. Anastomotic occlusion might be caused by long proximal
hepatic artery, end-to-side anastomosis, and small anastomotic stoma. And the increase in portal pressure caused by artery blood perfusion
decreased the pressure difference between arteries and veins, reducing blood flow rate at anastomotic stoma and finally resulting in
thrombosis. Moreover, the formation of compensatory arterial branches was beneficial for liver function recovery. No biliary fistula or
anastomotic leakage occurred in this case, suggesting that this surgical proposal was safe and effective. In summary, 3-D visualization
reconstruction can provide reliable basis and assistance for the accurate assessment and surgical design before pancreatoduodenectomy, and
also is conducive to full preparation for extensive pancreatoduodenectomy and vessel reconstruction. Meanwhile, from the case of this study,
we can see that it is certainly worth adopting portal vein arterialization when retention of hepatic artery is impossible or conventional
arterial anastomosis is required during pancreatoduodenectomy. Although portal vein arterialization is used in clinic as an important
remedial measure, its application still needs to be standardized. The authors thank National Natural Science Foundation of China (No.
81272246, 81101502, 61271336, 61327001) for the support. Great interests in this case: 3-D visualization reconstruction is important for
successful surgery of duodenal cancer. Funding/support: This study was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No.
81272246, 81101502, 61271336, 61327001). The authors have no conflicts of interest to disclose.
