Authors’ Contribution: Study Design Data Collection Statistical Analysis Data Interpretation Manuscript Preparation Literature Search Funds
Collection Conflict of interest: None declared Patient: Male, 74 Final Diagnosis: Infective endocarditis Symptoms: Apetite loss • fever
Medication: — Clinical Procedure: Transesophageal echocardiography Specialty: Cardiology Rare co-existance of disease or pathology Infective
endocarditis (IE) involving the mitral valve can but rarely lead to complete atrioventricular block (CAVB). A 74-year-old man with a history
of infective endocarditis caused by Streptococcus gordonii (S. gordonii) presented to our emergency room with fever and loss of appetite,
which had lasted for 5 days. On admission, results of serologic tests pointed to severe infection. Electrocardiography showed normal sinus
rhythm with first-degree atrioventricular block and incomplete right bundle branch block, and transthoracic echocardiography and
transesophageal echocardiography revealed severe mitral regurgitation caused by posterior leaflet perforation and 2 vegetations (5 mm and 6
mm) on the tricuspid valve. The patient was initially treated with ceftriaxone and gentamycin because blood and cutaneous ulcer cultures
yielded S. agalactiae. On hospital day 2, however, sudden CAVB requiring transvenous pacing occurred, and the patient’s heart failure and
infection worsened. Although an emergent surgery is strongly recommended, even in patients with uncontrolled heart failure or infection,
surgery was not performed because of the Child-Pugh class B liver cirrhosis. Despite intensive therapy, the patient’s condition further
deteriorated, and he died on hospital day 16. On postmortem examination, a 2×1-cm vegetation was seen on the perforated posterior mitral
leaflet, and the infection had extended to the interventricular septum. Histologic examination revealed extensive necrosis of the AV node.
This rare case of CAVB resulting from S. agalactiae IE points to the fact that in monitoring patients with IE involving the mitral valve,
clinicians should be aware of the potential for perivalvular extension of the infection, which can lead to fatal heart block. Infective
endocarditis (IE) involving the mitral valve often leads to supraventricular arrhythmia ; rarely a life-threatening conduction abnormality
such as atrioventricular block (AVB) arises . Here, we describe a case of Streptococcus agalactiae (S. agalactiae) IE involving the mitral
valve and resulting in complete AVB (CAVB). A 74-year-old man presented to our emergency room with fever and loss of appetite, both of which
had lasted for 5 days. His medical history included coronary artery bypass grafting, alcoholic liver cirrhosis, hypertension, and chronic
diabetic kidney disease. He also had a prior (1 year) episode of IE due to S. gordonii detected by MALDI-TOF. Vegetation (7 mm) on the
posterior mitral leaflet without mitral regurgitation or perforation was observed by transthoracic echocardiography and abolished eventually
with penicillin and gentamycin. On presentation, he appeared pale and unwell. His body temperature was 38.8°C, blood pressure was 118/70
mmHg, heart rate was 65 beats/min, respiratory rate was 22 breaths/min, and oxygen saturation (obtained by pulse oximetry) was 96% on room
air. On cardiopulmonary auscultation, there was no gallop, but a grade II/VI pansystolic murmur at the apex and minimal bibasilar crackles
were heard. A lower limb diabetic cutaneous ulcer and edema were noted. The electrocardiogram showed no specific changes compared with that
during prior hospitalization; normal sinus rhythm, first-degree AVB, incomplete right bundle branch block, and high voltage with ST-T
abnormalities in the precordial leads, suggestive of left ventricular hypertrophy (Figure 1). Chest X-ray showed mild cardiomegaly with mild
pulmonary edema. Laboratory tests revealed a leukocyte count of 10,300/mm3 (normal range, 4000–8000/mm3) a markedly elevated C-reactive
protein level of 25.5 mg/dL (normal range, <0.2 mg/dL), and an elevated N-terminal pro-brain natriuretic peptide (NT-pro-BNP) concentration
of 27,498 pg/mL (normal range, <125 pg/mL). Transthoracic echocardiography and transesophageal echocardiography revealed a perimitral
abscess, severe mitral regurgitation caused by posterior mitral leaflet perforation, and 2 vegetations (5 mm and 6 mm) on the tricuspid
valve (Figure 2A–2C). The patient was initially treated with ceftriaxone and gentamycin. Cultures of the blood and the cutaneous ulcer
yielded S. agalactiae. On hospital day 2, however, sudden CAVB requiring transvenous pacing occurred (Figure 3), and the heart failure and
infection worsened. Although emergency surgery was considered to control the infection and heart failure and to prevent thromboembolic
events, surgery was not performed because of the Child-Pugh class B liver cirrhosis. Despite intensive therapy, the patient’s condition
continued to deteriorate, and he died on hospital day 16. On postmortem examination, a 2×1-cm vegetation was found on the perforated
posterior mitral leaflet (Figure 4A) and 2 vegetations of 8 mm on the septal leaflet of the tricuspid valve (Figure 4B). Histologic
examination of the AV node and His bundle revealed extensive necrosis with fibrosis and calcification (Figure 4C–4E). This case of fatal
CAVB was characterized by bilateral IE with mitral and tricuspid valves involvement caused by S. agalactiae, by mitral abscess affecting the
AV node, and by late Streptococcal reinfection by a different species. Although IE due to S. agalactiae occurs infrequently, its incidence
has increased to 3% over recent years . When S. agalactiae IE occurs, the patient is likely to be of advanced age or to have a chronic
debilitating disease, such as diabetes. Mitral valve involvement is frequently observed, and multiple valve involvement occurs in 22% of
cases (vs. 15% of all cases of endocarditis overall) . Typically, the endocarditis progresses rapidly and leads to acutely decompensated
heart failure resulting from severe valve destruction. Although surgery is frequently performed, mortality remains high at 41–47% . IE in
the bilateral location is rare and reported to be 15–25% of multivalvular IE . Bilateral IE usually occurs in patients with intracardiac
devices or congenital heart disease , or intravenous drug users . However, the patient did not have these backgrounds. Furthermore,
postmortem examination revealed no atrial or ventricular septal perforation and histologic examination revealed mitral abscess showed no
tricuspid involvement. Given that, bilateral cardiac involvement in this case might be caused by hematogenous metastasis. Conduction
abnormalities develop in 4–10% of IE patients. Such abnormalities are most likely in patients with aortic valve IE and occur only rarely in
patients with mitral valve infection; only a few such cases have been reported . This is because although the AV node lies adjacent to the
mitral valve, the His-Purkinje system is anatomically closer to the aortic valve . In cases of conduction abnormality associated with
infective endocarditis, anatomical destruction by an abscess or perivalvular extension of the infection should be considered . Surgery is
strongly recommended, even in patients with uncontrolled heart failure or infection , but a conduction abnormality that persists even after
antibiotic therapy portends a poor prognosis . Furthermore, 41% post-cardiac surgery mortality has been reported for patients with class B
cirrhosis, and a Child-Pugh score >7 points has been shown to predict postoperative mortality with 86% sensitivity and 92% specificity .
Thus, although involvement of the interventricular septum in the perimitral abscess caused AV node necrosis in our case and led to AVB, the
patient was not considered a candidate for surgery because of the Child-Pugh class B cirrhosis (Child-Pugh score 8). The risk of reinfection
defined as a repeat episode of IE has been reported to be 6% . Repeat infective endocarditis due to a different species occurs less
frequently. Further studies are warranted for risk stratification and management of repeat endocardial infection. We encountered a rare case
of fatal CAVB resulting from S. agalactiae IE. In monitoring IE, clinicians should be aware of the possibility of perivalvular extension of
the infection and that such extension can lead to fatal heart block. In such case, surgical treatment is strongly indicated because medical
treatment alone is insufficient. Statement The authors have no conflict of interest to declare, and the work supported by departmental
resources only. Twelve-lead electrocardiogram obtained on admission. Transthoracic echocardiographic image (A) and transesophageal
echocardiographic images (B, C) obtained on the day of admission (apical 4-chamber view). (A) and (B) A perimitral abscess and severe mitral
regurgitation caused by posterior mitral leaflet perforation are apparent (arrows). (C) Two vegetations, one measuring 5 mm and the other
measuring 6 mm, are evident on the tricuspid valve on the tricuspid valve. Electrocardiogram showing complete atrioventricular block
obtained on hospital day 2. Macroscopic appearance of the left ventricle (A) and pathological features of atrioventricular (AV) node and His
bundle (B–D) on postmortem examination. (A) A vegetation, 2×1 cm in size, is present at the perforated posterior mitral leaflet (arrow). The
perforation site is indicated by a probe. (B) Two vegetations of 8 mm in size are present at the septal leaflet of the tricuspid valve
(arrow; another vegetation is hidden behind the septal leaflet in this view.) Serial cross sections including the AV node and His bundle.
The area encompassing the AV node and His bundle is replaced by a whitish area with the hyperemic border. (C) Histologic examination of the
(*) area revealed extensive necrosis with fibrosis and calcification of the AV node. No nodal structure is seen. (E) Histologic examination
of the (**) area revealed only a vague His bundle structure (arrowhead) that was surrounded by fibrosis with calcification and necrosis.
