Branchial cleft anomalies constitute a frequently encountered and commonly non-lethal disease in otolaryngology, and result from aberrant
embryonic development. The third branchial cleft fistula is one of the four known specific types of branchial cleft anomalies, and always
presents as recurrent neck abscess and suppurative thyroiditis. Here, we report an unexpected death due to severe neck infection following a
third branchial cleft fistula. A 19-year-old man was sent to the hospital with a 1-week history of recurrent left-sided neck abscess, and
was scheduled for incision and drainage of the abscess. However, before the surgery was performed, the man’s condition deteriorated and he
died. A review of his medical history showed that he had undergone a previous incision and drainage for a neck abscess 2 years ago.
Postmortem examination revealed that the fatal neck abscess was induced by a third branchial cleft fistula. We conclude that a
histopathological examination of neck tissue combined with a detailed review of medical history and examination of ultrasonographic and CT
images can provide a rapid and accurate diagnosis of third branchial cleft fistula. This common, non-lethal disease can potentially lead to
death if the neck infection is not properly diagnosed and treated. In medico-legal practice, medical examiners should be aware of this
condition, as this knowledge would be important in the diagnosis of the cause of death. Branchial cleft anomalies are frequently encountered
by otolaryngologists and constitute one of the uncommon anomalies of embryonic development . They arise from malformations occurring during
development of the fetal branchial apparatus and formation of the epithelized tract, and these, in turn, may give rise to some congenital
anomalies of the head and neck region . Approximately 17 % of all pediatric neck masses are related to branchial cleft anomalies . The third
branchial cleft fistula is a rare type of branchial cleft anomaly that only accounts for 2–8 % of all the anomalies [3, 4], with
approximately 94 % of these anomalies found on the left side . Anatomical findings show that the third branchial cleft fistula passes along
the carotid sheath and then travels between the glossopharyngeal and hypoglossal nerves. It pierces the thyrohyoid membrane and tracks above
the superior laryngeal nerve ending at the internal opening in the cephalad location of the pyriform fossa, forming a sinus fistula.
Sometimes it has an external opening in the lower neck or at the anterior border of the sternocleidomastoid muscle [1, 6]. Due to the
position of the common inner opening of third branchial cleft fistula , it is susceptible to neck abscesses . Here, we present a fatal case
involving a third branchial fistula followed by a severe neck abscess. To the best of our knowledge, reported cases of death due to this
disease are rare. The autopsy, pathology, and diagnostic standards of third branchial fistula are discussed in this paper. A 19-year-old man
presented to the emergency room at 4:00 p.m. with a severe, recurrent left-sided neck abscess that manifested itself over the previous week.
The patient had a high fever, ranging from 39.3–40.0 °C with left-sided odynophagia. A fluctuant neck mass could be felt, and the
temperature of the skin over the mass was higher than normal. A complete blood examination revealed a WBC count of 15.98 × 109/L, D-dimer
levels that reached 1.92 μg/mL, and levels of plasma fibrinogen at 6.96 g/L. Ultrasonography indicated swelling of the tissues in the left
side of the neck, and computerized tomography (CT) of axial sections of the neck showed an air pocket on the left side of the pharynx
(Fig. 1). The patient had presented with a similar condition 2 years ago and was managed by incision and drainage of the neck abscess. At
8:47 p.m., the patient was sent to the operating room for incision and drainage, and at 9:27 p.m. (just before the administration of general
anesthesia), his blood pressure suddenly dropped to 80/50 mm Hg and his blood oxygen saturation continuously decreased to 75 %. The patient
also became tachycardic and dysphoric. A tracheotomy was performed and a laryngoscope was inserted instantly, which showed that there was
purulence with blood rushing into the pharyngeal cavity. The condition of the patient continued to deteriorate, and all rescue measures
proved ineffectual. He was ultimately pronounced dead at 11:00 p.m.Fig. 1A CT image. Air pocket within the swelling tissues of the left neck
A CT image. Air pocket within the swelling tissues of the left neck A forensic autopsy was performed on the 4th day after the patient’s
death. A 5.0-cm-long vertical skin suture from the tracheotomy was observed in the middle of the anterior neck and a 3.0-cm-long horizontal
and old surgical scar was observed above the skin suture. We found a 10.0 cm × 5.0 cm × 4.0-cm mass with suppurative necrosis and hemorrhage
on the left side of the neck, and a 1.0-cm vertical tracheal incision was found under the isthmus of the thyroid gland. Hemorrhage and
necrosis of the left lobe of the thyroid gland could also be observed. The cervical muscles were difficult to separate due to severe
adhesion and inflammation of neck tissues, and remarkable swelling and a sinus were observed in the cranial end of the left-sided pyriform
fossa (Fig. 2). Several small abscesses were also found on the root of the tongue. Brain edema was obvious and splinter subarachnoid
hemorrhages could be seen externally. The heart weighed 315 g, and the thicknesses of the left and right ventricular walls were 1.3 and
0.3 cm, respectively. We additionally found some blood with purulence in the cavities of the trachea and bronchus. Edema was obvious in both
lungs and numerous hemorrhagic spots could be found on the surface. No meaningful lesion was observed in other organs.Fig. 2A sinus in the
cranial end of the left-sided pyriform fossa (white arrow) A sinus in the cranial end of the left-sided pyriform fossa (white arrow) We
found hemorrhages and necrosis with numerous inflammatory cells within the tissues of the anterior left neck. Squamous epithelial cells with
keratinizing or non-keratinizing cells and fibroplasia could be observed in the mesenchyme of the tissues in the left neck. Edema was severe
in the submucosa of the left pyriform fossa, which contained numerous small abscesses. Multiple hemorrhages and necrosis with many
inflammatory cells could be observed within the tissues of the tongue root. We found focal and scattered hemorrhages under the capsule of
the left thyroid, and most of the acinar cells appeared atrophied. The mesenchyme of the left lobe of the thyroid became fibrotic with
infiltration of numerous neutrophil granulocytes. Fibroplasia with infiltration of numerous inflammatory cells was also observed in the
membrane of the left submandibular gland. Fistulas surrounded by squamous epithelial cells with keratinizing and/or non-keratinizing cells
were found within the tissues of the pyriform fossa sinus. P63 was highly expressed in the squamous epithelial cells of the pyriform fossa
sinus (Fig. 3) on IHC examinations. Squamous epithelial cells of variable maturity and fistular structures (which were positive for PCK
and/or P63 on IHC), were distributed in the left cervical muscles (Figs. 4 and 5); and their nuclei were of different sizes. Numerous small
abscesses could be observed in the sternocleidomastoid muscle. Some of the cytoplasm of the neck muscles was quite acidophilic and even
appeared to be dissolving. Severe infiltration of lymphocytes and neutrophil granulocytes, and proliferation of fibers were observed in the
mesenchyme. Microthrombi were found in many small vessels of vital organs such as brain, lungs, kidney and spleen; and the proportion of
inflammatory cells in partial small vessels was high. Minor splinter hemorrhages were found in the myocardial mesenchyme of the
interventricular septum. Emphysema and focal hemorrhage in some alveoli were also observed. In addition to edema and minor anemia, there
were no significant pathologic changes in other organs; and toxicologic examination ruled out the presence of all common drug
substances.Fig. 3The P63-positive epithelial cells which surrounded the fistula (Five-pointed star) in the pyriform fossa sinus (IHC on P63
stain 100×)Fig. 4The fistulae structure surrounded by squamous epithelial cells in the neck tissue (IHC on P63 stain 200×)Fig. 5The PCK-
positive epithelial cells in the neck tissue (IHC on PCK stain 400×) The P63-positive epithelial cells which surrounded the fistula (Five-
pointed star) in the pyriform fossa sinus (IHC on P63 stain 100×) The fistulae structure surrounded by squamous epithelial cells in the neck
tissue (IHC on P63 stain 200×) The PCK-positive epithelial cells in the neck tissue (IHC on PCK stain 400×) Postmortem findings and the neck
CT manifestations (such as fistulas surrounded by squamous epithelial cells, severe neck swelling and thyroiditis; and the left-sided
pyriform sinus and air bags) all conformed to the clinical presentations and pathologic changes typical of third bronchial fistula. The
histopathologic examinations together with complete blood examinations revealed that the patient had a severe infection before death and the
blood was in a hypercoagulable state. Thus, the cause of death was considered to be septic shock following a neck infection. Branchial cleft
anomalies are due to aberrant embryonic development, and can result from different malformations of the branchial apparatus. These may
present as a fistula, sinus tract, or cyst, and encompass four known specific types . First, branchial cleft anomalies are the rarest type,
accounting for less than 1 % of the four types ; while second branchial cleft anomalies are the most common types, accounting for
approximately 95 %. Third branchial anomalies are also rare and they account for 2–8 % of all such cases [3, 4, 10]. The prevalence of
fourth cleft anomalies is low, at approximately 1–4 % . Although all four types of branchial cleft anomalies are able to give rise to neck
abscesses , they each have a unique anatomical appearance. Pathologically, the presence of keratinizing and/or non-keratinizing squamous
epithelial cells within neck tissue is thought to be a cytologic standard for diagnosing branchial fistulas . According to the standard
referenced above, IHC examinations of P63 and PCK in neck tissue are recommended for a further pathologic diagnosis. P63 is a specific
protein that is expressed in the nucleus of squamous epithelial cells, and PCK is a specific marker of keratinizing epithelial cells
expressed in the cellular cytoplasm. In the present study, we found the pyriform fossa sinus to be surrounded by P63-expressing squamous
epithelial cells. Numerous fistular structures surrounded by positive P63-expressing squamous epithelial cells and PCK-expressing
keratinizing epithelial cells were also observed in the left cervical muscles. The pathway taken by fourth branchial cleft fistulas has been
described as being similar to that of third branchial cleft fistulas. This makes it difficult to differentiate the two types of branchial
anomalies in clinical practice; and they are grouped as pyriform fossa sinus tracts by some authors [5, 13]. A pyriform fossa sinus is most
typically investigated with a CT scan , and the manifestation of air within a left neck swelling is considered to be a characteristic
finding of a lesion in a third and/or fourth branchial fistula . In a recent study on branchial anomalies, recurrent neck abscesses and
suppurative thyroiditis are thought to be the primary clinical presentations of a pyriform fossa sinus . In our case, the features shown by
neck CT and the inherent clinical syndromes conformed to the characteristic presentation of pyriform fossa sinus. Third and fourth branchial
cleft fistulas occupy a fine distinction in anatomy, although the two types of branchial anomalies have almost the same clinical
presentation. Studies have shown that the internal opening of third branchial cleft fistulas is located at the cranial end of the pyriform
fossa, and the tract passes above the superior laryngeal nerve; while the fourth branchial cleft fistulas originate at the caudal end of the
pyriform fossa and pass through the cricothyroid membrane beneath the superior laryngeal nerve [5, 16]. In our case, due to the patient’s
operation 2 years ago and cryopreservation of the body, it was impossible to separate the tract and identify the pathway. However, the
opening sinus in the cranial end of the pyriform fossa indicated that it was a third branchial cleft fistula. In a study of congenital
branchial cleft anomalies, the recurrent rate of lateral neck abscess and suppurative thyroiditis induced by third branchial fistulas was
reported to approach 42 and 45 %, respectively . Open-neck surgery with excision of the fistular tract (preceded by the administration of
appropriate antibiotics), is most commonly performed to control neck infection [7, 17]. In a study conducted by Nicoucar et al. , endoscopic
cauterization treatment was recommended to effect a radical cure (with limited complications) for third branchial cleft fistulas. Branchial
cleft fistulas are not associated with high mortality, as we found few fatal cases using PubMed, Google Scholar or other mainstream
publication search engines. However, according to our findings in the present case, such a fistula becomes a potentially lethal disease if
misdiagnosis or delayed/faulty treatment occurs. Collection of the neck CT scans is particularly valuable for observing the fistular tract,
sinus, or infection . Histopathologic examination of neck tissue is critical for a correct diagnosis, and is considered to be the gold
standard for branchial cleft fistulas . IHC can aid in confirming the common pathologic presentations, such as fistulas surrounded by
squamous epithelial cells in cervical muscles and other neck organs [1, 12]. In contrast, the fistular tract pathway should be confirmed
because it is a key point in the diagnosis of the specific type of branchial cleft anomaly. The examination of the position of the fistular
opening is a convenient method for a tentative diagnosis, and radiography of the fistula can provide a view of the pathway taken by the
fistular tract. In practice, medical examiners should be made aware of this condition at autopsy if neck cysts or abscesses are found, as
such information would be important in the diagnosis of the cause of death . This present analysis revealed that a proper histopathologic
examination of the neck tissue along with a review of the medical history and examinations of CT and ultrasonographic images can provide a
rapid and accurate diagnosis of third branchial cleft fistula. This commonly encountered and usually non-lethal disease can, however,
potentially lead to death if the neck infection is not properly treated. In medico-legal practice, medical examiners need to make themselves
aware of this condition, as this would be important in the diagnosis of the cause of death. Computed tomography Immunohistochemistry We
thank LetPub (http://www.letpub.com) for its linguistic assistance during the preparation of this manuscript. This work was supported by
National Key Research and Development Program of China (441626842, 2016YFC0800701), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No.
81273336) and the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities, HUST (No. 2016JCTD117). Please contact author for data requests.
FT carried out the main part of histological study, participated in the design, and drafted the manuscript. YL and LZ performed the autopsy
and carried out a part of histological study. WL participated in the autopsy. MFK and MM helped draft the manuscript. YZ conceived the case
report, revised the manuscript and supervised the autopsy. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. The authors declare that they
have no competing interests. The informed consent was obtained from the patient’s relatives for the publication of this case report. Not
applicable.
