Authors’ Contribution: Study Design Data Collection Statistical Analysis Data Interpretation Manuscript Preparation Literature Search Funds
Collection Conflict of interest: None declared Patient: Male, 50 Final Diagnosis: Lung cancer Symptoms: None Medication: — Clinical
Procedure: Surgery and chemotherapy Specialty: Oncology Challenging differential diagnosis Circulating tumor cells (CTCs) are tumor cells
that are shed from primary tumors and circulate in the peripheral blood. CTCs, as a surrogate of micro-metastasis, can be a useful clinical
marker, but their clinical significance remains unclear in lung cancer. We now report a case of lung cancer in which the count of CTCs was
useful in monitoring postoperative recurrence. A 50-year-old man had undergone right upper lobectomy for lung cancer (pT1bN2M0, stage IIIA
adenocarcinoma), followed by cisplatin-based adjuvant chemotherapy. After the patient’s operation, we initiated monitoring of CTCs using
CellSearch, and documented the change in the CTC count along with the development of cancer recurrence and response or progression to
chemotherapy given for recurrent disease. The CTC count may be useful in monitoring blood of patients with lung cancer. Circulating tumor
cells (CTCs) are tumor cells that are shed from primary tumors and circulate in the peripheral blood. CTCs, as a surrogate of micro-
metastasis, can be a useful clinical marker , but their clinical significance remains unclear in lung cancer. There are various CTC
isolation methods. The CellSearch system (Veridex, LLC) is the first and the only technology that has been approved by the US Food and Drug
Administration for clinical CTC testing in metastatic prostate, breast, and colorectal cancers. Using a magnetic field, CellSearch captures
CTCs from blood samples by using ferrofluid nanoparticles with antibodies that target epithelial cell adhesion molecules. Once the CTCs are
isolated, the system labels the cells with cytokeratin monoclonal antibodies, CD45, and 4′,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI). CTCs are then
identified if cytokeratin and DAPI staining is positive, and CD45 staining is negative, as well as by other morphology features. Reports
have validated CellSearch for CTC identification in metastatic breast, prostate, and colorectal cancer, with a cutoff set at 5, 5, and 3,
respectively, of CTCs detected by CellSearch per 7.5 mL peripheral blood sample . Here, we present a case in which the count of CTCs
evaluated with CellSearch was useful in monitoring postoperative recurrence and response to chemotherapy. A 50-year-old male patient, who
was a smoker, underwent left upper lobectomy for adenocarcinoma of the lung (pT1b-N2M0, stage IIIA, driver mutations were negative) and
postoperative adjuvant chemotherapy (four cycles of cisplatindocetaxel). After the adjuvant chemotherapy, he enrolled in the clinical trial,
“A feasibility study of postoperative adjuvant chemotherapy using platinum-based chemotherapy followed by maintenance TS-1 for completely
resected pathologic stage II-IIIA non-small cell lung cancer with a biomarker study of circulating tumor cell.” Informed consent was
obtained from all study patients, including our case study patient. We initiated measuring the CTC count at the start of the study, and the
CTC count during the chemotherapy (TS-1) was “0 or 1,” indicating the presence of 0 or 1 CTCs in 7.5 mL of peripheral blood at room
temperature. Two years after surgery, multiple lymph nodes were observed on computed tomography (CT), and the CTC count was elevated to “5”
(Figure 1). Thus, the study patient received four courses of first-line chemotherapy (cisplatin, pemetrexed, and bevacizumab). After each
chemotherapy course was finished, the level of CTCs was “0” and his CT after completion of the four cycles of chemotherapy showed the
metastasis was reduced by 50%. Although CTCs disappeared after completion of the first-line chemotherapy, the CTC count was again elevated
to “80,” along with development and progression of distant metastases in the brain and the liver. After two cycles of second-line
chemotherapy (carboplatin-nanoparticle paclitaxel) and whole brain radiation, the level of CTCs was “58.” Although the second-line
chemotherapy provided a modest effect with some decrease in the CTC-count, the patient died of exacerbation of interstitial pneumonia
induced by chemotherapy, and diagnosed by the findings on the CT scan that indicated reticular shadow and bronchoalveolar lavage fluid
indicating lymphocytosis. In the present case, the CTC count changed in accordance with tumor recurrence as well as response or progression
to chemotherapy (Figure 1), suggesting that the CTC count may be useful in monitoring the blood of patients with lung cancer. In addition,
this case showed that CTC count is likely to be useful as a therapeutic monitoring tool, even for lymph node only metastasis. Even though
the patient’s CT scan showed metastases at the time of recurrence only in the lymph nodes, the CTC count was 5. A literature search did not
find any other reports showing the relationship between the CTC count and lymph node metastasis. In other types of cancers, there have been
numerous reports that include measurement of CTC count and that found it to be useful in therapy evaluation and prognosis . However, for
lung cancer, reports of CTC count as a useful evaluation marker of disease is scant. Among the many available blood-based biomarkers, serum
carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) has often been used as a bio-marker for lung cancer, especially for adenocarcinoma in clinical practice.
Tanaka et al. reported that when comparing the CTC test and CEA test for diagnostic performance, the CTC test had insufficient performance
because of its low sensitivity. On the other hand, they reported that the CTC test had a significant diagnostic performance for predicting
the absence or presence of distant metastasis, whereas serum CEA showed an insufficient performance. Future prospective studies are needed
to confirm the clinical significance of CTC count in the diagnosis and treatment of patients with lung cancer. This case suggested that CTC
count may be useful in monitoring the blood of patients with lung cancer. Additional case studies are needed. Graph showing the trend of
circulating tumor cells (CTCs). The level of CTCs increased at the time of recurrence, and new lesions appeared in the liver and brain.
