Alternating hemiplegia of childhood (AHC) is a rare neurological disorder that manifests recurrent attacks of hemiplegia, oculogyric, and
choreoathetotic involuntary movements. De novo mutations in ATP1A3 cause three types of neurological diseases: AHC; rapid-onset dystonia-
Parkinsonism (RDP); and cerebellar ataxia, areflexia, pes cavus, optic atrophy, and sensorineural hearing loss (CAPOS) syndromes. It remains
to be determined whether or not a rare mutation in ATP1A3 may cause atypical phenotypes. A 7-year-old boy presented with recurrent symptoms
of generalized paralysis since 1 year and 5 months of age. Hypotonia, dystonia, and choreoathetosis persisted with exacerbation under
febrile conditions, but no cerebellar ataxia had ever evolved in 6 years. Whole-exome sequencing (WES) was performed to determine his
genetic background, and mutations were validated by the Sanger method. Crude protein extracts were prepared from the cultured cells, and
expression of the wild-type or mutant ATP1A3 proteins were analyzed by Western blotting. WES identified a de novo pathogenic mutation in
ATP1A3 (c.2266C > T:p.R756C) for this patient. A literature overview of two reported cases with p.R756C and p.R756H mutations showed both
overlapping and distinct phenotypes when compared with those of the present case. The expression of the mutant form (R756C) of ATP1A3 did
not differ markedly from that of the wild-type and D801N proteins. This study confirmed that p.R756C mutation of ATP1A3 cause atypical forms
of AHC-associated disorders. The wide spectra of neurological phenotypes in AHC are linked to as-yet-unknown deficits in the functions of
mutant ATP1A3. The online version of this article (doi:10.1186/s12883-016-0680-6) contains supplementary material, which is available to
authorized users. Alternating hemiplegia of childhood (AHC) is a rare neurological disorder characterized by recurrent attacks of hemiplegia
and involuntary movements of the body trunk, limbs, and eyes . While the majority of AHC cases are sporadic, the few familial cases suggest
that AHC might be inherited as an autosomal dominant pattern . Most patients start suffering from these symptoms in infancy, but the
clinical picture varies among cases. Recently, de novo mutations in ATP1A3 have been shown to cause AHC, rapid-onset dystonia-Parkinsonism
(RDP), and cerebellar ataxia, areflexia, pes cavus, optic atrophy and sensorineural hearing loss (CAPOS) syndrome . Increasing numbers of
mutations are being reported, which has helped clarify the phenotypic spectrum of these ATP1A3-associated disorders [1, 4, 6, 8]. However,
the genotype-phenotype correlations and their pathogenic mechanisms remain elusive . In this report, we present a Japanese boy with AHC who
showed mixed phenotypes of AHC with RDP and CAPOS. The clinical signs of this case and a literature overview suggest that an Arg756 mutation
of ATP1A3 is linked to the atypical form of AHC with persistent muscle weakness and involuntary movements. The present 7-year-old boy was
the third offspring of healthy non-consanguineous parents. He was born at 38 weeks of gestational age, weighing 3376 g. No asphyxia or other
perinatal events were noted. He was able to control his head at 5 months, sat independently at 8 months, and walked at 14 months of age.
When he was infected with influenza at 1 year and 5 months of age, generalized hypotonia and flaccid paralysis rapidly developed within a
few hours on the second day of illness. When he was taken by ambulance to the hospital, his respiratory conditions and heart rate were
unaltered, but all of his voluntary movements of the eyes, mouth, limbs, and trunk had disappeared. Both eyes remained open, but no verbal
or non-verbal responses were made to external stimuli. Bouncing and rapid oculogyric movements in random directions were also prominent
signs on admission. Muscle hypotonia was remarkable, while deep tendon reflexes were absent. Hypoglycemia, acidosis, and unbalanced
electrolytes were excluded based on the findings of blood gas analyses, blood cell counts, and serum chemistry. Brain magnetic resonance
imaging (MRI) showed no parenchymal lesions or atrophy (Fig. 1a). Single-photon emission tomography detected laterality in cerebral blood
perfusion on the 22nd day of admission (Fig. 1b). Electroencephalogram (EEG) did not show any high-voltage slow waves, epileptiform
discharges, or other signs of encephalopathy (Fig. 1c). From the third week of admission, he began to show voluntary movements in his mouth
and hands. Concurrently, choreoathetotic movements in the upper and lower extremities appeared and subsequently continued for over 6 years,
until the present. Accordingly, his muscle strength slowly recovered within 2–3 months after the onset, but it never returned to the prior
condition. The rapid and random ocular movements were substantially ameliorated within a month and eventually disappeared at 5 years. No
signs of cerebellar ataxia were evident throughout the initial admission and thereafter.Fig. 1A de novo p.R756C mutation in ATP1A3
identified in the present case. a Brain MRI at the first admission. No parenchymal lesions were detected. Sagittal T1 (upper left), axial
fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (upper right), diffusion-weighted image (lower left), and apparent diffusion coefficient map (lower
right) images are shown. b 99mTc-ECD-SPECT at the 22nd day of admission. The arrows denote the area with decreased perfusion in the left
hemisphere and the right striatum with axial (upper) and coronal (lower) images. c A representative EEG recording on admission. Note that 8-
to 9-Hz alpha rhythms are present over the occipital region (squared), whereas slow-wave bursts and epileptiform discharges are absent in
the background. d General appearance of the present case at 7 years of age. The photograph shows dystonic posture with prominent
choreoathetotic movements of the upper extremities. Written informed consent was obtained from the parents for the use of this image. e A de
novo p.R756C mutation in the present case. Sequence chromatograms for the trio (father, mother, and the patient) are shown. C to T
transition (c.2266C > T:p.R756C, red arrow) was present only in the patient and not in either of his parents. f The secondary structure of
ATP1A3 protein with annotation for the p.R756C mutation. Trans-membrane domains (columns) and cytoplasmic and extracellular loops (black
lines) of ATP1A3 are schematically presented. The mutated amino acid residue (red dot) and the two trans-membrane domains (M4 and M5) are
annotated for ease of orientation. g Representative images of Western blotting. HEK293T cells were transfected either with an empty plasmid
(−) or ATP1A3 (WT, D801N and R756C)-encoding plasmids. Specific signals of ATP1A3 (112 kDa) and actin-beta (ACTB, 42 kDa) are annotated with
the black arrowheads. Upper bands of ATP1A3 indicate the non-specific signals (white arrowhead). Bar plots represent mean ± SD values for
the relative signal intensity of ATP1A3 to that of ACTB (data from three independent experiments) A de novo p.R756C mutation in ATP1A3
identified in the present case. a Brain MRI at the first admission. No parenchymal lesions were detected. Sagittal T1 (upper left), axial
fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (upper right), diffusion-weighted image (lower left), and apparent diffusion coefficient map (lower
right) images are shown. b 99mTc-ECD-SPECT at the 22nd day of admission. The arrows denote the area with decreased perfusion in the left
hemisphere and the right striatum with axial (upper) and coronal (lower) images. c A representative EEG recording on admission. Note that 8-
to 9-Hz alpha rhythms are present over the occipital region (squared), whereas slow-wave bursts and epileptiform discharges are absent in
the background. d General appearance of the present case at 7 years of age. The photograph shows dystonic posture with prominent
choreoathetotic movements of the upper extremities. Written informed consent was obtained from the parents for the use of this image. e A de
novo p.R756C mutation in the present case. Sequence chromatograms for the trio (father, mother, and the patient) are shown. C to T
transition (c.2266C > T:p.R756C, red arrow) was present only in the patient and not in either of his parents. f The secondary structure of
ATP1A3 protein with annotation for the p.R756C mutation. Trans-membrane domains (columns) and cytoplasmic and extracellular loops (black
lines) of ATP1A3 are schematically presented. The mutated amino acid residue (red dot) and the two trans-membrane domains (M4 and M5) are
annotated for ease of orientation. g Representative images of Western blotting. HEK293T cells were transfected either with an empty plasmid
(−) or ATP1A3 (WT, D801N and R756C)-encoding plasmids. Specific signals of ATP1A3 (112 kDa) and actin-beta (ACTB, 42 kDa) are annotated with
the black arrowheads. Upper bands of ATP1A3 indicate the non-specific signals (white arrowhead). Bar plots represent mean ± SD values for
the relative signal intensity of ATP1A3 to that of ACTB (data from three independent experiments) He had experienced three episodes of
recurrent attacks with flaccid paralysis on febrile illness at 1.9, 3.3, and 5.7 years of age (Additional file 1: Figure S1). In each
episode, the involuntary movements disappeared while generalized paralysis persisted for a few weeks. Electroencephalogram (EEG) and MRI
studies did not show signs of encephalopathy or neuro-degeneration (data not shown). He had occasional anuresis without signs of paralysis
or fever, but his vesicorectal functions were evaluated as normal. At present, he is unable to stand or walk alone, and his daily activity
is limited since he uses a wheelchair (Fig. 1d). His verbal skill is severely affected by dysarthria, but he can compose sentences and
perform single-digit calculations using a touch-panel display and keyboard. As such, his language perception, social skills, and other
cognitive functions were considered minimally affected. He has had no arrhythmic episodes or shown any abnormal features on
electrocardiography. After filtering the polymorphic variations from the WES dataset, we identified two de novo mutations in the coding
regions of ATP1A3 (c.2266C > T:p.R756C) and TOM1L1 (p.Gly4Alafs*16) and one intronic deletion in C3 (c.1976-22_20TCTdel). All of these
mutations were validated by the Sanger method (Fig. 1e and Additional file 1: Figure S2). We considered that the de novo missense mutation
of ATP1A3 was likely pathogenic in this case, whereas the effects of the other two events remain to be determined. The variant sequence in
ATP1A3 encodes the protein with an amino acid substitution of Arg756 with Cys. The amino acid residue is located within a conserved sequence
across species and was predicted to be deleterious with the Polyphen-2 (http://genetics.bwh.harvard.edu/pph2/), Sift
(http://sift.jcvi.org/), and Mutation Taster (http://www.mutationtaster.org/) programs (Additional file 1: Table S5). We further ensured
that this mutation was absent in more than 500 healthy individuals. Across the whole protein structure of ATP1A3 (http://www.hprd.org/), the
Arg756 residue was located close to the junction of the largest cytoplasmic loop and the fifth trans-membrane domain (Fig. 1f). The p.R756H
mutation, previously reported, causes atypical phenotypes of RPD . Recently, another case carrying a de novo p.R756C mutation was shown to
have similar clinical features to the present case . To compare the phenotypic spectra of ATP1A3-assocaited disorders, we summarized the
clinical features of the reported cases and those of AHC, RDP, and CAPOS (Table 1). The three cases carrying mutations of p.Arg756 to Cys or
His all shared the core symptoms of recurrent encephalopathy and acutely developed paralysis followed by prolonged hypotonia, dystonia, and
choreoathetosis. We also verified that these cases presented with the mixed phenotypes of AHC, RDP, and CAPOS.Table 1Neurological spectrum
of the present and previously reported cases harboring ATP1A3 mutations at Arg756 a AHC alternating hemiplegia of childhood b RDP rapid-
onset dystonia-parkinsonism c CAPOS cerebellar ataxia, areflexia, pes cavus, optic atrophy and sensorineural hearing loss NA no data
available, Overlapping features aer highlighted Neurological spectrum of the present and previously reported cases harboring ATP1A3
mutations at Arg756 a AHC alternating hemiplegia of childhood b RDP rapid-onset dystonia-parkinsonism c CAPOS cerebellar ataxia, areflexia,
pes cavus, optic atrophy and sensorineural hearing loss NA no data available, Overlapping features aer highlighted Previous studies
suggested that RDP-causing mutations were associated with unstable expression of mutant ATP1A3 proteins in cultured cells. We therefore
investigated whether or not the p.R756C mutation of ATP1A3 might be expressed at a lower level in HEK293T cells than the wild type and the
typical AHC-causing mutant protein (p.D801N). Western blotting showed that the wild type and the two mutant ATP1A3 proteins (p.D801 and
p.R756C) were expressed at comparable levels (Fig. 1g). The present case showed a unique neurological phenotype that overlapped with those
in previous cases carrying the p.R756C or p.R756H mutation of ATP1A3. Similarities in their clinical pictures suggested that this mutation
is linked to the distinct phenotypes from AHC and other diagnosis of ATP1A3-associated disorders. In contrast to the previous two cases, the
present case did not show cerebellar ataxia. In addition, our case developed involuntary eye movement, one of the key signs of AHC, whereas
the other two cases lacked this finding. Although these differences might be subtle, we emphasize in this report that the phenotypic
spectrum may vary, even among individuals harboring the same mutation. Previously reported cases with overlapping AHC/RDP or AHC/CAPOS
phenotypes suggest that there might be a broad phenotypic spectrum in ATP1A3-associated disorders [7, 9, 15, 16]. We propose that p.R756C
and other rare mutations in ATP1A3 may produce an extended phenotype with mixed components of AHC, RDP, and CAPOS (or MARC). Variable
phenotypes with the same mutation suggest that the present and previous cases might bear second mutations or inherited causes in their
genomes. Regarding non-neurological symptoms, our patient has never presented with arrhythmic episodes or abnormal features on
electrocardiography. However, systematic reviews of the cardiac function must be conducted for successful long-term management, as recently
reported . When the patient was initially transferred to our department, he was found to have altered consciousness because he did not
respond to any neurological examinations or environmental stimuli. However, serial EEG recordings showed regular background activity with no
encephalopathy-like slow waves at the acute phase of the recurrent events. These EEG findings strongly suggested that the cortical function
was preserved and that acute encephalopathy was unlikely to have been the cause of the atonic events. Given that similar events were
observed in the previous two cases, distinguishing severe motor symptoms from encephalopathy may be difficult, due to the systemic, non-
focal neurological signs. On the other hand, ECD-SPECT in our case revealed an aberrant local perfusion of cerebral blood flow at the atonic
phase. We valued this finding because it implied that the patient had a transiently altered state of consciousness due to thalamic and
hippocampal dysfunction. Using the structural model for the alpha-3 subunit in the Na+/K+ ATPase complex, earlier studies proposed molecular
mechanisms through which pathogenic mutations in ATP1A3 might affect the functions of Na+/K+ ATPase [18, 19]. In the present study, the
expression of the p.R756C mutant did not differ markedly from those of wild type and the p.D801N mutant protein in cultured cells,
suggesting that this mutation was not critical for protein folding under physiological conditions. Heinzen et al. demonstrated that
introducing RDP-associated mutations in ATP1A3 resulted in its lower expression in cultured cells . However, our experimental data did not
support the hypothesis that R756C mutation might affect the protein stability of ATP1A3. The details regarding the mechanisms that maintain
the protein stability remain to be clarified, and no phenotypic modifiers for ATP1A3 have been identified so far. Given that febrile
conditions were associated with recurrent paralysis in our case, the expression and stability of Na+/K+ ATPase protein might fluctuate under
inflammatory conditions in the brain. Future translational studies should attempt to identify the key molecular signals that determine the
stability of the ATP1A3 protein and clarify their functional roles in vivo. In summary, this report extended the neurological spectrum of
ATPA1A3-associated disorders. Further studies will be necessary to clarify they full mutation spectrum of ATP1A3 and its correlation with
the clinical phenotypes of patients. In addition, the accumulation of exome-wide variation data for atypical cases will help improve our
understanding of the mechanisms underlying the genotype-phenotype correlations. Linking the genetic findings with the data from biological
studies for identifying convergent molecular signals downstream of ATP1A3 will provide new insight into potential targets of therapy in
future translational medicine. Additional file 1: This file contains supplementary methods with one table (Table S1), the clinical course of
this case (one supplementary figure 1), and supplementary data for whole-exome sequencing analysis (Tables S2-5 and supplementary figure 2).
(PDF 1180 kb) This file contains supplementary methods with one table (Table S1), the clinical course of this case (one supplementary figure
1), and supplementary data for whole-exome sequencing analysis (Tables S2-5 and supplementary figure 2). (PDF 1180 kb)
technetium-99 m-ethylcysteinate-dimer single-photon emission computed tomography Alternating hemiplegia of childhood Cerebellar ataxia,
areflexia, pes cavus, optic atrophy and sensorineural hearing loss Electroencephalogram Magnetic resonance imaging Rapid-onset dystonia-
Parkinsonism Whole-exome sequencing [ATPase Na+/K+ transporting subunit alpha 3; ACTB [Actin beta] We thank Drs. Masayuki Sasaki (National
Center of Neurology and Psychiatry) and Ryutaro Kira (Fukuoka Children’s Hospital) for helpful discussions and critical review of this
manuscript. This study was supported by JSPS KAKENHI Grant Number 15 K0962 (Y.S.), 26461547 (Y.I.), 16 K09991 (M.S.), 26860848 (M.T.), Life
Science Foundation of Japan, Takeda Science Foundation, The Mother and Child Health Foundation, and The Japan Epilepsy Research Foundation
(Y.S.). The datasets supporting the conclusions of this article are included in the article and the additional file. Details for the
experimental protocol and methods are provided in a (Additional file 1: Table S1). Exome data processing, variant calls, and annotations
were performed as described (Additional file 1: Tables S2-4) . The ATP1A3-encoding plasmids were gifts from Drs. Erin L. Heinzen and David
B. Goldstein at Duke University . Standard procedures were used for cell culture. The RIPA-insoluble fraction was subjected to SDS-PAGE and
Western blotting . HK and YS wrote the manuscript. HK performed and YS supervised the experiments. RF, N Miyake, HS, and N Matsumoto
conducted the WES. MT, LS, HO, SA, KN, MS, YI and HT assessed the neurological signs, neuroimaging data, and test results of this patient.
YS and TH designed this study. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. There is nothing to report for competing interests in
this study. Consent for publication was obtained as mentioned above. This study was approved by the Institutional Review Board at Kyushu
University (M. Sumimoto, #658-00). Experiments were conducted under a stringent compliance to the institutional guideline and our
experimental protocol (23–53). Written informed consent was obtained from the parents for participating this study, whole-exome sequencing
analysis, publication of the obtained results, and the use of the patient’s photographs.
