Actinomyces meyeri is a Gram positive, strict anaerobic bacterium, which was first described by Meyer in 1911. Primary actinomycotic
osteomyelitis is rare and primarily affects the cervicofacial region, including mandible. We present an unusual case of osteomyelitis of a
long bone combined with myoabscess due to A. meyeri. A 70-year-old man was admitted for pain and pus discharge of the right elbow. Twenty-
five days before admission, he had hit his elbow against a table. MRI of the elbow showed a partial tear of the distal triceps tendon and
myositis. He underwent open debridement and partial bone resection for the osteomyelitis of the olecranon. Biopsy showed no sulfur granules,
but acute and chronic osteomyelitis. The excised tissue grew A. meyeri and Peptoniphilus asaccharolyticus. Intravenous ceftriaxone was
administered and switched to oral amoxicillin. Infection of the extremities of actinomycosis often poses diagnostic difficulties, but it
should not be neglected even when the characteristic pathologic findings are not present. Members of the genus Actinomyces, originally
classified as a fungus because of its branching characteristic, were first described in the early nineteenth century . Actinomyces meyeri, a
Gram positive anaerobic bacterium, is common inhabitant of the oral cavity and human pharynx region, rarely affecting long bones . Reported
cases of osteomyelitis caused by Actinomyces spp. were mainly the cervicofacial area, usually mandible. Few cases of long bone osteomyelitis
caused by Actinomyces spp. have been reported. In this case report, we present a rare case of olecranon osteomyelitis caused by A. meyeri
confirmed by culture, not by pathology. A 70-year-old man was referred to our hospital for severe pain, swelling, and pus discharge in his
right elbow. Twenty five days prior to admission, he had fallen and injured his right elbow, with a puncture of the elbow with a tear three
centimeters long. Five days later, he underwent incision and drainage of his right elbow for an infected abscess at a private clinic.
However, despite treatment, the pain and swelling showed rapid progression. His medical history was remarkable for uncontrolled type 2
diabetes mellitus for twenty years. He had smoked ten cigarettes daily for 40 years. He denied a history of drug abuse and had not undergone
any specific dental treatment. At admission, his temperature was 36.6°C, blood pressure was 125/80 mmHg, pulse rate was 80 beats/min, and
respiration rate 16 breaths/min. His mental status was alert. The wound on the right elbow had a laceration of three centimeters in size.
The olecranon was exposed with signs of inflammation of the adjacent muscles with draining discharge (Fig. 1). The wound on the right elbow
with three-centimeter of laceration and signs of inflammation. His leukocyte count was 7,280/mm3, with 70% neutrophils, 20% lymphocytes, and
6% monocytes. Blood test showed C-reactive protein of 4.69 mg/dl (normal <0.5 mg/dl), an erythrocyte sedimentation rate of 65 mm/h, a high
glucose level of 231 mg/dl, aspartate transaminase of 26 U/L and alanine transaminase of 36 U/L. Glucosuria was also noted in the urine
analysis and HbA1c was 9.8%. Magnetic resonance imaging showed osteomyelitis of olecranon and myoabscess (Fig. 2A and B). Empirical
ceftriaxone (2 g q24h) and metronidazole (500 mg q8h) were administered intravenously. The patient underwent surgical interventions
consisting of debridement of affected bone and partial bone resection on the first hospital day. (A) MRI T2 coronal slide of the epicondyle
showing partial tear of the distal triceps tendon, from olecranon insertional portion to 5 cm above. (B) MRI T2 axial slide (enhanced).
Complicated hematoma with myositis and cellulites is also noted (arrow). Pus from the excised medial and deep triceps tissue biopsy
specimens yielded A. meyeri and Peptoniphilus asaccharolyticus using a VITEK II ANC card (bioMérieux, Marcy l’Etoile, France). Histological
examination of the biopsy specimen revealed inflammatory cellular infiltration with abscess formation, but no colonies of sulfur granules
were observed, even with repeated examination by pathologists (Fig. 3). Abscess is noted, mostly composed of neutrophils. Abscess surrounds
mature bone fragments. (Hematoxylin and eosin stain, x200) The patient’s antibiotic regimen was switched to oral amoxicillin-clavulanic acid
(500 mg/125 mg q8h for seven months) and he was discharged home with ambulation on hospital day 29. After a follow-up period of seven
months, there were no clinical signs or symptoms of recurrence. Actinomyces spp. normally colonize the mouth, colon and vagina and usually
cause osteomyelitis of head and neck . The most commonly infected body regions are cervicofacial (55%), abdominopelvic (20%) and
pulmonothoracic (15%) . Involvement of other parts of the body is uncommon, and because of the exclusively endogenous habitat of the
bacteria, actinomycosis of an extremity is very rare . One percent of reported case of anaerobic osteomyelitis had Actinomyces spp. . To the
best of our knowledge, among 15 English-language reports of long bone osteomyelitis of the extremity, only one case of primary upper
extremity actinomycotic osteomyelitis was reported in 1954 . This is the first case of olecranon osteomyelitis due to A. meyeri in Korea.
The source of actinomycotic organisms and the mechanism whereby the bacteria are transmitted to the site of infection in cases involving a
long bone are usually unclear . However, most of the long bone osteomyelitis due to A. meyeri occurred after traumatic injury which creates
an anaerobic environment predisposing to this bacterial growth . In this case reported here, the patient did not have oral cavity injury nor
did have poor dental hygiene. There was no evidence of other organs involvement, which can cause disseminated infection, either. Although
environmental sources have been implicated on rare cases , it is presumed that possible routes of infection is piercing trauma from an
environmental source. A combination of appropriate microbiologic, molecular and pathologic studies would maximize the chances of successful
diagnosis of actinomycosis . Half of the primary actinomycosis cases were diagnosed clinicopathologically, and in the remaining cases,
Actinomyces spp. were grown from culture specimens . Thus, actinomycosis should not be excluded even though the characteristic pathologic
findings are not present, though the single most helpful diagnostic clue for actinomycosis is presentation of sulfur granules in the
specimens . One case of pulmonary actinomycosis has been reported in which pleural biopsy tissue showed only reactive fibroblastic tissue
with fibrin and acute inflammation, but the specimens grew actinomycosis . Our patient had an olecranon osteomyelitis due to A. meyeri with
P. asaccharolyticus, which was identified by VITEK II, not by sulfur granules in multiple sections. As a result of fibrosis with or without
inflammation, sulfur granules are easily missed in the histologic sections of a surgical specimen . Identification of Actinomyces spp. is
difficult. Commonly, identification in clinical laboratories is based upon a limited range of conventional biochemical test. Colonial
morphology and gas-liquid chromatography can be used. Recent advances in microbiologic identification technique, 16s rRNA gene amplification
is known to increase the sensitivity and specificity of diagnosis . In this case, however, further evaluation was not possible because
specimen was discarded after identification by VITEK II card. In review of 203 case reports in Korea, tissue cultures were performed in only
6.9% (14 cases among 203). Most cases of actinomycosis (93%, 189 cases among 203)were diagnosed only histopathologically. We found two
actinomycosis cases diagnosed only by tissue culture, meaning that the actinomycosis might have been underestimated or neglected by
diagnostic maneuver. For successful diagnosis of actinomycosis, not only pathologic studies, but also microbiologic studies should be
performed. It is interesting that other bacteria have been cultured together, called companion microbes and these bacteria may serve as
copathogens by aiding in the inhibition of host defenses or by reducing oxygen tension . Companion anaerobic bacteria facilitate Actinomyces
spp. infection by establishing a microaerophillic environment . Peptoniphilus, companion microbes, Gram-positive anaerobic cocci, originally
classified in the genus Peptostreptococcus, is a part of the normal microflora in human beings and animals. Peptoniphilus spp. are usually
associated with opportunistic human infections . Although studies of Gram-positive anaerobic cocci have been limited due to the lack of a
valid identification scheme, recently they are increasingly recognized as important pathogens . Treatment of osteomyelitis due to
Actinomyces spp. requires prolonged use of antibiotics with β-lactam ring such as high dose penicillin or amoxicillin . Tetracycline,
erythromycin and clarithromycin are effective alternatives . Surgical intervention should be considered in some complicated cases . The
duration of antibiotic therapy is debated and individualized, intravenous penicillin for two to six weeks, followed by oral therapy with
penicillin or amoxicillin for six to twelve months, is a reasonable guideline for serious infections . Our patient was treated successfully
with three weeks of intravenous ceftriaxone and a seven month course of oral amoxicillin. In this case report, we present the first case of
olecranon osteomyelitis due to A. Meyeri with P. asaccharolyticus with an emphasis on the diagnostic maneuver of actinomycosis.
Traditionally, actinomycotic infection was considered, when the typical pathologic findings were present. However, bacteriologic
identification is as necessary as pathologic findings to prevent treatment failure of actinomycosis infection. Conflict of Interest: No
conflicts of interest.
