Little is known about delay in regaining gait ability at a chronic stage after brain injury. In this study, we report on a single patient
who regained the gait ability during 2 months of intensive rehabilitation starting 2 years after a brain injury. A 40-year-old male patient
diagnosed with viral encephalitis underwent comprehensive rehabilitation until 2 years after onset. However, he could not even sit
independently and presented with severe physical deconditioning and severe ataxia. To understand his neurological state, 4 neural tracts
related to gait function were reconstructed, and based on the state of these neural tracts, we decided that the patient had the neurological
potential to walk independently. Therefore, we assumed that the main reasons for gait inability in this patient were severe physical
deconditioning and truncal ataxia. Consequently, the patient underwent the following intensive rehabilitative therapy: administration of
drugs for control of ataxia (topiramate, clonazepam, and propranolol) and movement therapy for physical conditioning and gait training. As a
result, after 2 months of rehabilitation, he was able to walk independently on an even floor, with improvement of severe physical
deconditioning and truncal ataxia. We described the rehabilitation program in a single patient who regained the gait ability during 2 months
of intensive rehabilitation starting 2 years after a brain injury. In rehabilitation, gait regaining is a common goal in patients with gait
deficits due to brain injury. Gait requires comprehensive components: stepping movements, muscle power of leg and trunk, maintenance of
equilibrium, interlimb coordination, somatosensory input, cardiovascular fitness, and so on. Therefore, gait dysfunction, a common sequela
of brain injury, is usually caused by motor weakness, somatosensory problems, balance problems, incoordination of movement, and so on. The
vast majority of the patients regain gait at the early stage after brain injury. However, little is known about delayed regaining of gait
ability at a chronic stage after brain injury. We believe that research on the delayed regaining of gait ability following brain injury is
very important because this could be helpful for successful rehabilitation of gait regaining in patients with long-term gait dysfunction. We
report on a patient who regained the ability to ambulate after 2 months of intensive rehabilitation that was only started 2 years after the
initial brain injury. A 40-year-old male patient diagnosed with viral encephalitis was treated for status epilepticus at the neurology
department of a university hospital for 6 months without complications and was then transferred to a local rehabilitation hospital (Fig.
1A). No previous medical history of neurological, physical, or psychiatric illness was noted. Despite undergoing general and comprehensive
rehabilitation (administration of drugs, physical and occupational therapy, and neuromuscular electrical stimulation) until 2 years after
onset, he was not able to walk independently. Consequently, he was transferred to a rehabilitation department of another university hospital
approximately 2 years after onset. His cognitive function was within normal range (Mini-Mental State Examination score, 27). The patient
could not even sit independently and presented with mild ataxic dysarthria, severe physical deconditioning due to being bedridden long term,
quadriparesis (upper extremities—right side: 4/left side: 4 and lower extremities—right side: 3/left side: 3, no muscle atrophy), spasticity
of the ankle (Modified Ashworth Scale: 1+ grade), severe resting and intentional tremor on 4 extremities, and severe truncal ataxia (Scale
for Assessment and Rating of Ataxia [SARA, 26 points] and Functional Ambulation Category [FAC, 0 point]) (Table 1). SARA (0–40 points: a
higher score indicates a worse stage) and FAC (0–5 points: a lower score indicates a worse state) were measured for ataxia and gait
function, respectively. At that time, he was prescribed the following drugs without change or stopping: spasticity control (baclofen 60 mg
and diazepam 15 mg) and epilepsy control (dantrolene 75 mg, levetiracetam 1500 mg, and valproate 1800 mg). To understand the neurological
state, 4 neural tracts (the corticospinal tract and corticoreticulospinal tract for leg weakness, and the dentatorubrothalamic tract and
corticopontocerebellar tract for ataxia) were reconstructed. For reconstruction of these neural tracts, we used DTI-Studio software (CMRM,
Johns Hopkins Medical Institute, Baltimore, MD, USA) based on deterministic tracking for CST and CRT with a fractional anisotropy of 0.2 and
a tract turning angle of <60° and FMRIB Software Library (University of Oxford, Oxford, UK) based on probability tracking for DRTT and CPCT
with a result threshold of 2 streamlines. CST, CRT, DRTT, and CPCT were analyzed using regions of interest (ROIs) as follows: CST: ROI
1—anterior portion of upper pons on the axial image and ROI 2—anterior portion of lower pons on the axial image; CRT: ROI 1—reticular
formation of the medulla on the axial image and ROI 2—tegmentum of the midbrain on the axial image; DRTT: ROI 1—dentate nucleus on the
coronal image, ROI 2—junction of the superior cerebellar peduncle on the coronal image, and ROI 3—contralateral red nucleus of the upper
midbrain on the axial image; and CPCT: ROI 1—primary sensorimotor cortex on axial image, ROI 2—anterior pons on the axial image, and ROI
3—contralateral cerebellar hemisphere on coronal image. Although partial injuries were observed in the right CST, both CRT, and both CPCTs,
based on the state of these neural tracts, we decided that the patient had the neurological potential to walk independently (Fig. 1B).
Therefore, we assumed that the main reasons for gait inability in this patient were ascribed to severe physical deconditioning and truncal
ataxia. Consequently, the patient underwent the following intensive rehabilitative therapy: administration of drugs for control of ataxia:
topiramate: 37.5 mg, clonazepam: 4 mg, and propranolol: 60 mg; and movement therapy (30 min/d and 5 times/wk) for physical conditioning and
gait training in sections of the physical and occupational therapy, and bedside: motor strengthening of both legs and trunk, exercises for
trunk stability and control, static and dynamic balance training in sitting and standing positions, and neuromuscular electrical stimulation
(30 min/d and 5 times/wk) of both knee extensor and ankle dorsiflexor. As a result, after 2 months rehabilitation, he was able to walk
independently on an even floor with improvement of severe physical deconditioning, truncal ataxia (SARA: 14 points and FAC: 3 points), and
spasticity (Modified Ashworth Scale: 0 grade). The patient provided written informed consent, and the study protocol was approved by the
Yeungnam University Hospital Institutional Research Board. (A) T2-weighted brain magnetic resonance (MR) images at 2 years after onset show
no abnormality. (B) The corticospinal tract, corticoreticulospinal tract (CRT), dentatorubrothalamic tract, and corticopontocerebellar tract
(CPCT) show the integrity between cortex and brainstem or cerebellar hemisphere in both hemispheres. In contrast, the right corticospinal
tract, both CRTs, and both CPCTs show partial injuries (arrows) at the subcortical white matter. Clinical data for the patient. In this
study, we report on a patient who regained the gait ability during 2 months of intensive rehabilitation, starting 2 years after brain
injury. Before admission to our hospital, although the patient received general and comprehensive rehabilitation including the
administration of drugs, physical, and occupational therapy for range of motion exercise, motor strengthening, and neuromuscular electrical
stimulation, he did not improve enough to walk. However, during 2 months rehabilitation at our hospital, he could walk independently. We
considered the main reasons for regaining of gait ability in this patient. First, when the patient started rehabilitation at our hospital,
we decided that he had the neurological potential to walk independently by confirmation of 4 neural tracts related to gait function that
were not so severely injured as to preclude walking. In addition, descending tracts involving the bulbar reticular activating system that
were not injured could contribute in the successful rehabilitation. Second, we examined the main causes of gait inability in this patient
(severe physical deconditioning and truncal ataxia) and designed an intensive rehabilitation program to resolve these problems within 2
months. At the start of rehabilitation, the patient could not even sit independently; however, after rehabilitation, the patient was able to
walk independently. We think the administration of drugs (topiramate, clonazepam, and propranolol) was effective for control of severe
ataxia including tremor and movement therapy was effective for regaining of physical condition and gait ability. Therefore, we suggest that
clinicians and therapists seeing patients who are not able to walk at a chronic stage after brain injury should determine the neurological
potential for independent gait of the patient, determine precise causes of gait inability, then design an intensive and individualized
rehabilitation program including appropriate prescription of drugs. Since the introduction of DTI, a few studies have reported on delayed
gait recovery following brain injury. In 2012, Kwon and Jang reported on a patient who did not recover motor function of the left lower
extremities until 6 months after onset of putaminal intracerebral hemorrhage. However, following active rehabilitation including medications
for apraxia, the patient gradually recovered motor function on the left lower extremities due to resolution of apraxia, and he could finally
walk independently at 9 months after the stroke. The next year, Seo et al described a patient with intracerebral hemorrhage, who showed
delayed gait recovery due to relief of severe leg spasticity, which started at 8 months after the initial injury. During the 3 months’
rehabilitation (from 8 to 11 months after onset), the patient regained the ability to walk independently on even floor. By contrast, with
our patient, resolution of severe physical deconditioning and truncal ataxia appeared to be the main causes of regaining gait ability. In
conclusion, we described the rehabilitation program in a patient who regained the gait ability by 2 months intensive rehabilitation that
started 2 years after brain injury. We believe that this rehabilitation program could be a good example to rehabilitate patients who cannot
walk following brain injury. However, this study is limited because it is based on a single case report. Therefore, we suggest that further
studies including larger case numbers of patients who could not walk are warranted. Abbreviations: CPCT = corticopontocerebellar tract, CRT
= corticoreticulospinal tract, CST = corticospinal tract, DRTT = dentatorubrothalamic tract, FAC = Functional Ambulation Category, SARA =
Scale for Assessment and Rating of Ataxia. This research was supported by Basic Science Research Program through the National Research
Foundation of Korea (NRF) funded by the Ministry of Education (2015R1D1A4A01020385). The authors have no conflicts of interest to disclose.
