Synovial sarcoma is a malignant soft tissue sarcoma which arises near joints. The most frequent metastasis sites of synovial sarcoma are the
lungs, lymph nodes, and bone. Pancreatic metastasis is quite rare; only 3 cases have been reported worldwide to date. We herein present the
4th case of pancreatic metastasis from synovial sarcoma. A 32-year-old man underwent extended excision of synovial sarcoma in the left
pelvis and femur in 2009. In 2013, follow-up contrast-enhanced computed tomography revealed a 35-mm heterogeneously enhanced mass in the
pancreas body. Endoscopic ultrasound-guided fine needle aspiration of the mass revealed a diffuse proliferation of atypical spindle cells in
a fascicular arrangement. Because the histology was quite similar to the resected specimen of synovial sarcoma in 2009, the mass was
suspected to be a metastasis from synovial sarcoma. Laparoscopic distal pancreatectomy with adjuvant adriamycin/ifosfamide chemotherapy was
subsequently performed. Synovial sarcoma-specific SS18-SSX1 (synovial sarcoma translocation, chromosome 18-synovial sarcoma X1) or SS18-SSX2
chimera mRNA was detected in the resected specimen, confirming the diagnosis of metastasis from synovial sarcoma. The patient did well for
30 months without recurrence. This case suggests that pancreatic metastasis from synovial sarcoma can be successfully treated by
metastasectomy with adjuvant chemotherapy. Soft tissue sarcoma is a rare mesenchymal neoplasm that accounts for about 1% of all adult
cancers. Synovial sarcoma, first reported in 1893, is one of about 50 histological types of soft tissue sarcoma but accounts for
approximately 10%. It initially manifests as an indolent and palpable slowly growing mass. The long duration of symptoms and initial slow
growth sometimes give a false impression of benign characteristics. However, because of its aggressive potential, metastasis occurs in
approximately 50% of patients, and the most frequent sites of metastasis are the lungs (74%–81%), lymph nodes (3%–23%), and bone (10%–20%).
Pancreatic metastasis from synovial sarcoma is quite rare, and a standard management regimen has not been established. In this report, we
present a case of solitary pancreatic metastasis from synovial sarcoma that was successfully treated by radical metastasectomy with adjuvant
chemotherapy. A 32-year-old man without a medical history first visited Osaka University Hospital in 2009 for the treatment of synovial
sarcoma in the left pelvis and femur (Fig. 1). He underwent extended tumor resection and reconstruction with constrained total hip
megaprosthesis with neoadjuvant adriamycin/ifosfamide (AI) therapy for 4 cycles, followed by adjuvant AI therapy for 1 cycle. He was
regularly followed up thereafter, and no recurrence was observed on annual computed tomography (CT) examinations until 2012. Synovial
sarcoma (arrowheads) in the left pelvis and femur resected in 2009. (A) T1- and (B) T2-weighted images of nonenhanced magnetic resonance
imaging. (C) Macroscopic and (D) microscopic appearance of the resected specimen (hematoxylin–eosin staining, ×200). In 2013, however,
follow-up contrast-enhanced CT revealed a 35-mm heterogeneously enhanced hypervascular mass in the pancreas body (Fig. 2A). Heterogeneous
enhancement was also observed on contrast-enhanced ultrasonography (Fig. 2B). On gadolinium-ethoxybenzyl-diethylenetriamine pentaacetic
acid–enhanced magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), the mass was depicted as a hypo-, hyper-, and hyper-intense lesion on T1-, T2-, and
diffusion-weighted images, respectively (Fig. 2C–E). It was heterogeneously enhanced on arterial-phase images (Fig. 2F). Hepatobiliary-phase
images revealed no space-occupying lesions suggesting liver metastasis. On fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography, the mass showed
low uptake (maximum standardized uptake value of 2.3) (Fig. 2G), and no abnormal uptake was observed in the whole body. The patient was
asymptomatic, and laboratory tests of routine biochemical parameters and tumor markers including carcinoembryonic antigen, carbohydrate
antigen 19–9, elastase I, and sialyl Lewis X antigen were all within their respective normal ranges. Imaging appearance of pancreatic
metastasis from synovial sarcoma (arrowheads). (A) Arterial-phase image of contrast-enhanced computed tomography. (B) Vascular-phase image
of contrast-enhanced ultrasonography. (C) T1-, (D) T2-, and (E) diffusion-weighted images and (F) arterial-phase images of gadolinium-
ethoxybenzyl-diethylenetriamine pentaacetic acid–enhanced magnetic resonance imaging. (G) Fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography
image. Pathological examinations included endoscopic ultrasound (EUS)-guided fine needle aspiration (FNA). On grayscale EUS, the lesion was
depicted as a well-demarcated and heterogeneous mass with abundant cystic components (Fig. 3A). Although the mass showed expansive growth
and oppressed the splenic vein, no invasion was suspected. Avoiding cystic elements, a 22-gauge puncture needle was transgastrically
inserted into the mass, and specimens were collected (Fig. 3B). Rapid cytological examination revealed atypical spindle-shaped cells (Fig.
3C). Histological examination revealed a uniform population of small spindle-shaped cells in a fascicular arrangement (Fig. 3D).
Immunohistochemically, these cells were positive for bcl-2 and negative for pan-cytokeratin, epithelial membrane antigen (EMA), chromogranin
A, synaptophysin, and vimentin. Ki-67 antigen staining was about 10% positive. Although the immunohistochemical pattern was not typical for
synovial sarcoma, the mass was considered to be pancreatic metastasis from synovial sarcoma because these microscopic findings were quite
similar to the resected specimen of monophasic synovial sarcoma in 2009. Endoscopic ultrasound (EUS)-guided fine needle aspiration (FNA) of
the pancreatic metastasis from synovial sarcoma (arrowheads). The puncture needle is indicated by an arrow. (A) Grayscale EUS, (B) FNA, (C)
cytology (Papanicolaou stain, ×400), and (D) histology (hematoxylin–eosin staining, ×200) of the tumor. We judged that the metastatic lesion
could be completely resected without residual tissue and performed laparoscopic distal pancreatectomy under adequate informed consent.
Although a minor pancreatic fistula occurred postoperatively, it was conservatively treated and resolved in a short period of time. The
resected tumor was a well-circumscribed mass measuring 45 × 30 mm with prominent cystic changes (Fig. 4A, B). Microscopic examination
revealed a monophasic appearance comprising only spindle cells, similar to the biopsy sample obtained by EUS-FNA, and glandular structures
were not found (Fig. 4C). Immunohistochemistry revealed a positive reaction to bcl-2 (diffuse) and EMA (focal) (Fig. 4D, E) and a negative
reaction to pan-cytokeratin, α-smooth muscle actin (SMA), CD34, and c-kit. Synovial sarcoma-specific SS18-SSX1 (synovial sarcoma
translocation, chromosome 18-synovial sarcoma X1) or SS18-SSX2 chimera mRNA was detected by reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction
(RT-PCR), which confirmed the diagnosis of pancreatic metastasis from synovial sarcoma (Fig. 4F). Resected specimen of the pancreatic
metastasis from synovial sarcoma (arrowheads). (A) Macroscopic appearance and (B) cut surface of the tumor. (C) Histology (hematoxylin–eosin
staining, ×200). Immunohistochemistry for (D) bcl-2 and (E) epithelial membrane antigen. (F) Electrophoresis of SS18-SSX1 (synovial sarcoma
translocation, chromosome 18-synovial sarcoma X1) or SS18-SSX2 chimera mRNA in the tumor after reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain
reaction. The primers used were as follows: forward primer, 5′-CAACAGCAAGATGCTACCA-3′ and reverse primer, 5′-CACTTGCTATGCACCTGATG-3′. The
patient underwent 2 cycles of adjuvant AI chemotherapy followed by 2 cycles of ifosfamide, carboplatin, and etoposide without remarkable
adverse events. At the time of this writing, he had been doing well without recurrence for 30 months postoperatively. The diagnosis of
synovial sarcoma generally starts with imaging examinations. On contrast-enhanced CT/MRI, synovial sarcoma is typically depicted as a
heterogeneously enhanced, well-circumscribed mass. Because these imaging findings are not specific for synovial sarcoma, however,
histological analysis is necessary for the diagnosis. Synovial sarcoma is histologically divided into 3 subtypes: the monophasic type
composed only of spindle cells (50%–60%), the biphasic type composed of both epithelial and spindle cell elements (20%–30%), and the poorly
differentiated type (15%–20%). Among these histological subtypes, prognosis was reported to be not different between monophasic type and
biphasic type. Meanwhile, the clinical course of poorly differentiated type tends to be aggressive with early recurrence and metastasis. On
immunohistochemistry, synovial sarcoma is positive for epithelial markers (e.g., keratins and EMA), bcl-2, and transducin-like enhancer of
split-1, and negative for skeletal muscle markers (e.g., desmin and α-SMA) and CD34. However, the sensitivity and specificity of these
markers are insufficient. Conversely, identification of the SS18-SSX1 or SS18-SSX2 fusion gene resulting from the chromosomal translocation
t (X;18)(p11;q11), first published in 1994, reportedly has a sensitivity of 94% and a specificity of 100% by RT-PCR. Owing to this high
diagnostic ability, demonstration of the SS18-SSX1 or SS18-SSX2 fusion gene is currently considered to be the gold standard diagnostic test
for synovial sarcoma. The optimal treatment of synovial sarcoma is surgical resection, if the mass is resectable, followed by adjuvant
chemotherapy using adriamycin and ifosfamide. For unresectable masses, systemic chemotherapy is usually attempted. Synovial sarcoma is an
intermediate- to high-grade sarcoma, and the 5- and 10-year survival rates reportedly range from 36% to 76% and 20% to 63%, respectively. We
have herein presented a case of pancreatic metastasis from synovial sarcoma. Pancreatic metastasis from synovial sarcoma is quite rare, and
only 3 cases have been reported worldwide to date. The clinical characteristics of these 3 cases and our case are summarized in Table 1.
Both imaging and histological examinations were performed to achieve the correct diagnosis in all cases. However, the imaging features of
pancreatic metastasis from synovial sarcoma have a broad range of differential diagnoses, including pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors,
pancreatic metastases from renal cell carcinoma (RCC), gastrointestinal stromal tumors, paraganglioma, solitary fibrous tumors, pancreatic
hamartoma, intrapancreatic accessory spleen, and others. Some of these tumors have a histological appearance similar to that of synovial
sarcoma, and immunohistochemistry is not always reliable. Therefore, the presence of the SS18-SSX1 or SS18-SSX2 fusion gene should be
investigated to confirm the diagnosis; ours is the only case in which its existence was proven. Because our case shows that SS18-SSX1 or
SS18-SSX2 chimera mRNA can also be detected in pancreatic metastasis, demonstration of the SS18-SSX1 or SS18-SSX2 fusion gene in a biopsy
sample obtained by EUS-FNA might be the gold standard technique for the pretreatment diagnosis of pancreatic metastasis from synovial
sarcoma. Characteristics of reported cases and our case of pancreatic metastasis from synovial sarcoma. We performed metastasectomy to treat
the tumor in this case. For unresectable synovial sarcoma, adriamycin or ifosfamide-based chemotherapy is usually attempted. However,
sufficient evidence of drug therapy has not been established, and the effect is limited. Only in cases of pulmonary metastasis can long-term
survival be expected by pulmonary metastasectomy if complete resection is achieved. The question then arises regarding whether pancreatic
metastasectomy enables long-term survival of patients with pancreatic metastasis from synovial sarcoma. Metastatic pancreatic cancer
accounts for approximately 2% of pancreatic cancers. Common primary tumors are lung cancer, breast cancer, RCC, malignant melanoma, and
gastrointestinal cancers. Although most patients with pancreatic metastasis are not usually candidates for resection because they are
considered to have systemic micrometastasis, the effectiveness of pancreatic metastasectomy has been proven in specific cancer types such as
RCC. When considering surgical resection of pancreatic metastases, 4 factors are reportedly associated with a good prognosis after resection
for pancreatic metastases from various malignant tumors: primary RCC, a >3-year interval between resection of the primary tumor and
development of pancreatic metastases, isolated pancreatic metastases, and no prior recurrence. With respect to synovial sarcoma, the
effectiveness of pancreatectomy for metastatic lesions is completely unknown because only one case in which pancreatic metastasectomy was
performed has been reported to date (Table 1). In that case, however, a disease-free survival period of >6 years was achieved after
resection. Similar to that case, the metastatic tumor in our case was solitary without extrapancreatic lesions. Additionally, our case met 3
of the 4 criteria previously reported to be associated with a good prognosis after pancreatic metastasectomy: a >3-year interval between
resection of the primary tumor and development of pancreatic metastases, isolated pancreatic metastases, and no prior recurrence. Therefore,
we considered that long-term survival could be expected by pancreatic metastasectomy in our case as well. Actually, the metastatic lesion
was successfully resected and the patient had been disease-free for 30 months at the time of this writing. This result suggests that
pancreatic metastasis from synovial sarcoma can be successfully treated by metastasectomy unless apparent extrapancreatic metastasis is
present. In conclusion, we have presented a quite rare case of solitary pancreatic metastasis from synovial sarcoma that was successfully
treated by radical metastasectomy with adjuvant chemotherapy. Pancreatic metastasectomy could be considered for pancreatic metastasis from
synovial sarcoma without extrapancreatic metastasis. Additional cases should be accumulated to investigate the characteristics of patients
who are indicated for metastasectomy and to establish pancreatic metastasectomy as a treatment option for pancreatic metastasis from
synovial sarcoma. Abbreviations: AI = adriamycin/ifosfamide, CT = computed tomography, EMA = epithelial membrane antigen, EUS = endoscopic
ultrasound, FNA = fine needle aspiration, MRI = magnetic resonance imaging, RCC = renal cell carcinoma, RT-PCR = reverse transcriptase-
polymerase chain reaction, SMA = smooth muscle actin, SS18-SSX1 = synovial sarcoma translocation, chromosome 18-synovial sarcoma X1. The
authors report no conflicts of interest.
