Correspondence to Dr.　Ichiro Deguchi, ideguchi@saitama-med.ac.jp We herein report three ischemic stroke patients who underwent emergency
carotid artery stenting after receiving intravenous tissue plasminogen activator (t-PA) treatment. All patients received antiplatelet
medications immediately before stent placement for loading as well as dual antiplatelet therapy after stenting. Under high-dose and dual
antiplatelet therapy, none of the three patients showed symptomatic intracranial hemorrhaging. However, one case showed reocclusion of the
placed stent after acute thrombosis. As a result, new treatment strategies for the use of antiplatelet agents during emergency stent
placement must be developed, particularly for patients who have received intravenous t-PA therapy. In recent years, the efficacy of
endovascular treatment after the administration of intravenous recombinant tissue plasminogen activator (rt-PA) has been demonstrated in
several studies (1-5). In fact, the number of patients undergoing endovascular treatment after intravenous rt-PA administration has been
increasing. In addition, carotid artery stent placement during endovascular treatment is performed in selected patients in clinical
practice. However, strong evidence that supports the effectiveness of emergent stenting treatment is unavailable. Patients who undergo
emergency stent placement are recommended to receive antiplatelet therapy to prevent in-stent thrombosis (6), but only a few studies have
reported the use of these drugs after carotid artery stenting and intravenous rt-PA administration (7,8). We herein report our experience
with acute antiplatelet therapy in three stroke patients who underwent emergency carotid artery stent placement after intravenous rt-PA
administration. A 71-year-old man was brought to our hospital with the chief complaint of acute left hemiplegia. He had a history of
hypertension and non-valvular atrial fibrillation (NVAF) and had been receiving oral administration of rivaroxaban (15 mg/day). On arrival,
the patient's National Institute of Health Stroke Scale (NIHSS) score was 14. Head magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed acute cerebral
infarction in the right basal ganglia extending to the corona radiata [diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI)-Alberta Stroke Program Early
Computed Tomography Score (ASPECTS): 9] (Figure A). Magnetic resonance angiography (MRA) revealed a right internal carotid artery occlusion
(Figure B). At 110 minutes after the onset of stroke, rt-PA (time from the last administration of rivaroxaban to rt-PA: 590 minutes) and
cerebral endovascular treatment were administered. The thrombus was aspirated using the PenumbraⓇ system (Penumbra, Alameda, USA). Although
balloon percutaneous transluminal angioplasty (PTA) was performed for the residual right internal carotid artery stenotic lesion, elastic
recoil occurred. Therefore, clopidogrel and aspirin were administered at loading doses of 300 and 200 mg, respectively, followed by
emergency carotid artery stenting (Carotid WALLSTENT, Boston Scientific, Natick, USA) (Figure C). At 300 minutes after onset (time from the
last administration of rivaroxaban to recanalization: 780 minutes), complete recanalization was achieved. After treatment, antiplatelet
therapy (clopidogrel 75 mg + aspirin 100 mg) was continued. The patient's systolic blood pressure (SBP) was maintained at 100 to 130 mmHg by
a continuous intravenous infusion of nicardipine. During the follow-up period, the patient remained free of concurrent symptomatic
intracranial hemorrhaging (sICH) (Figure D). Although no neurologic changes were noted, follow-up MRA performed on hospital day 4 showed
reocclusion, likely resulting from in-stent thrombosis (Figure E). On hospital day 35, the patient's modified Rankin Scale (mRS) score was
2, and he was transferred to another hospital. Imaging findings of the three cases. Case 1: A-E. A: Diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI) on
arrival showed acute cerebral infarction in the right basal ganglia extending to the corona radiata, B: Magnetic resonance angiography (MRA)
on arrival showed an occlusion of the right internal carotid artery, C: Before and after stent placement, D: Computed tomography (CT) at
24hours after t-PA showed no hemorrhagic change, E: MRA on the 4th hospital day showed reocclusion due to in-stent thrombosis. Case 2: F-J.
F: DWI on arrival showed acute cerebral infarction in the right frontal temporal lobe and corona radiata, G: MRA on arrival showed a
bilateral occlusion of the internal carotid artery, H: Before and after stent placement, I: CT at 24 hours after t-PA showed a hemorrhagic
change in the right basal ganglia, J: MRA on the 5th hospital day. The carotid stent was patent. Case 3: K-O. K: DWI on arrival showed acute
cerebral infarction in the left basal ganglia extending to the corona radiata, L: MRA on arrival showed an occlusion of the left internal
carotid artery, M: Before and after stent placement, N: CT at 24 hours after t-PA showed no hemorrhagic change, O: MRA on the 14th hospital
day. The carotid stent was patent. An 85-year-old man was brought to our hospital with the chief complaints of left hemiplegia and
dysarthria. He had a history of hypertension, old cerebral infarction, and NVAF and had been receiving oral administration of aspirin (100
mg/day). On arrival, the patient's NIHSS score was 14. Head MRI revealed acute cerebral infarction in the right frontal temporal lobe and
corona radiata (DWI-ASPECTS: 6) (Figure F). MRA revealed a bilateral internal carotid artery occlusion (Figure G). At 240 minutes after
onset, rt-PA was administered, and cerebral endovascular treatment was additionally administered. Because stenosis at the origin of the
right internal carotid artery was so severe that a therapeutic catheter could not be crossed over the lesion, clopidogrel was administered
at a loading dose of 300 mg, followed by emergency carotid artery stenting (WALLSTENT) (Figure H). Then, aspiration with the PenumbraⓇ
system was performed for a right middle cerebral artery occlusion (M1 segment), and complete recanalization was achieved at 323 minutes
after onset. After treatment, antiplatelet therapy (clopidogrel 50 mg + aspirin 100 mg) was continued. SBP was maintained at 100 to 130 mmHg
by a continuous intravenous infusion of nicardipine. Head computed tomography performed 24 hours later revealed asymptomatic hemorrhagic
changes (Figure I). The course of rehabilitation therapy was uneventful, however, aortic dissection occurred on hospital day 38. The patient
was therefore transferred to the department of cardiovascular medicine. A 72-year-old man with aphasia and a history of diabetes mellitus
and dyslipidemia was brought to a previous hospital with a chief complaint of right hemiplegia. The patient's NIHSS score was 24. Head MRI
revealed acute cerebral infarction in the left basal ganglia extending to the corona radiata (DWI-ASPECTS: 9) (Figure K). MRA revealed a
left internal carotid artery occlusion (Figure L). After the administration of rt-PA at 130 minutes after onset, he was transferred to our
hospital, where cerebral endovascular treatment was added. To remove an occlusion at the origin of the left middle cerebral artery, the
thrombus was retrieved using the PenumbraⓇ system and Solitaire FRⓇ (Covidien, Irvine, USA). Although PTA for residual stenosis in the left
internal carotid artery was performed, elastic recoil occurred. Therefore, clopidogrel and aspirin were administered at loading doses of 300
and 200 mg, respectively, followed by emergency carotid artery stenting (WALLSTENT) (Figure M). Complete recanalization was achieved at 366
minutes after onset. Antiplatelet therapy (clopidogrel 50 mg + aspirin 100 mg) was subsequently continued. The patient's SBP was maintained
at 100 to 130 mmHg by a continuous intravenous infusion of nicardipine. During the follow-up period, he remained free of concurrent sICH
(Figure N). On hospital day 25, the patient's mRS score was 2, and he was transferred to another hospital. The use of antiplatelet drugs
within 24 hours after intravenous rt-PA administration for patients undergoing emergency stent placement was approved by the ethical
committee of our hospital (application no. 10-054). Carotid artery stent placement during endovascular treatment for patients who are
unresponsive to intravenous rt-PA administration has become a popular treatment in clinical practice. The Multicenter Randomized Clinical
Trial of Endovascular Treatment for Acute Ischemic Stroke in the Netherlands reported that acute carotid artery stent placement was
performed in 12.9% of patients (1). We have performed immediate endovascular treatment after intravenous rt-PA administration for 29
patients in our hospital since September 2012; 23 of these patients had a stroke in the area of anterior circulation. In particular, carotid
artery stent placement was performed in three (13%) of 23 patients. The leading complication of carotid artery stent placement after
intravenous rt-PA administration is considered to be sICH. In the present study, all three patients received loading doses of antiplatelet
drugs during surgery and subsequently received dual antiplatelet therapy, without showing sICH. In our hospital, the imaging indications for
endovascular treatment after intravenous rt-PA administration are based on the MRA-DWI mismatch status (9). In this regard, DWI-ASPECTS ≥6
and a major artery occlusion [internal carotid artery or middle cerebral artery (M1 segment)] were considered to indicate MRA-DWI mismatch
and therefore provided support for the use of additional endovascular treatment. Selecting patients according to their MRI findings (e.g.,
MRA-DWI mismatch) appears to be important to prevent sICH. In our department, the goal of BP control in patients undergoing carotid artery
stenting after intravenous rt-PA therapy is set at SBP ≤130 mmHg. Strict BP control is important to prevent hyperperfusion syndrome. In
addition, patients with a vulnerable plaque are at an increased risk for artery-to-artery embolism and acute in-stent thrombosis, as shown
in case 1. In this study, one of the patients experienced thrombus formation in the placed stent without any worsening of the neurological
symptoms. Symptomatic in-stent thrombosis is rare and is reported to be between 0.04-2% (10,11). However, because in-stent thrombosis can
result in serious consequences, emergency surgical treatment (e.g., PTA, stent-in-stent placement, or thrombectomy) should be considered for
such cases. There is no evidence of emergency stent placement for acute cerebral infarction and there are no clear guidelines for specific
medications or loading dosage of antiplatelet agents at the time of stent placement (6). In each of the presented cases, the antiplatelet
drug types and doses for both pre-stent loading and after therapy were decided by the attending physician according to the patient's
background variables, including age and pre-onset history of antiplatelet drug use. Therapeutic strategies for the use of antiplatelet drugs
in patients undergoing emergency stent placement should be established, with a particular focus on the type and dosing of antiplatelet drugs
for patients that have received intravenous rt-PA therapy.
