Correspondence to Dr.　Takahiro Takazono, takahiro-takazono@nagasaki-u.ac.jp A 35-year-old non-HIV patient developed pulmonary cryptococcosis
after the initiation of infliximab. He recovered by fluconazole treatment and completed the therapy for a total of 6 months. However, he
experienced a relapse 16 months later during retreatment with infliximab, revealing an interesting clinical course contradicting
retreatment. This case also represents the first case of relapsed pulmonary cryptococcosis suspected during treatment with a biologic agent.
Both of these aspects generated important clinical questions about the length of pulmonary cryptococcosis treatment and the necessity of
introducing a second prophylaxis for such patients. Patients with diseases, such as rheumatoid arthritis and other autoimmune conditions,
have greatly benefited from treatment with biologic agents such as antitumor necrosis factor-alpha (anti-TNF-α) and interleukin-6 (IL-6)
antagonists. These biologics, however, can trigger the development of certain infectious diseases such as deep-seated mycosis (1).
Cryptococcosis, an important cause of mycosis, has high morbidity and mortality rates in immunocompromised patients. We previously reported
a patient who developed pulmonary cryptococcosis during anti-TNF-α treatment (2). Because this patient developed pulmonary cryptococcosis
again after the completion of 6 months of fluconazole (FLCZ) treatment and subsequent resumption of anti-TNF-α treatments, we herein present
a follow-up case report describing this situation, which revealed an interesting clinical course contradicting retreatment. A 35-year-old
man with Crohn's disease was referred to our respiratory department due to a high fever and the presence of an infiltrated pulmonary nodule
after eight infusions of infliximab (IFX). Pulmonary cryptococcosis was diagnosed in this patient according to positive cryptococcal antigen
test results (×16 and ×32) of the bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF). He was subsequently treated with 400 mg/day oral FLCZ. The
infiltration of the left lower lobe of the lung gradually improved and was nearly eliminated after 3 months of FLCZ treatment. IFX treatment
was resumed 1 month after the initial FLCZ treatment to control the patient's Crohn's disease. He received FLCZ for 6 months, as we
previously described (2). IFX therapy was continued once every 8 weeks, and prednisolone was adjusted to approximately 10 mg/day. The
patient, however, developed a high fever, resistance to β-lactam and levofloxacin antibiotics, general fatigue, and night sweats at 16
months after the completion of FLCZ treatment and 22 months after restarting IFX treatment. Chest radiography and computed tomography (CT)
revealed a 3×2 cm mass-like region and a small nodule in the left and right upper lobes of the lung (Fig. 1). He had no symptoms indicating
any type of central nervous system infection, such as a headache or consciousness disturbance. He also had no history of significant
exposure to birds, including pigeons, or travel abroad around the time of the clinical progression or the onset of the first episode.
Laboratory tests revealed a normal leukocyte count (4,300/mm3) and a slightly elevated C-reactive protein level (1.76 mg/dL). The test for
serum cryptococcal antigen (Eiken, Tokyo, Japan) was negative, and the β-D-glucan assay level (Wako, Osaka, Japan) was below the cut-off
value (3.2 pg/mL). Bronchoscopy with BALF was performed, and a transbronchial lung biopsy (TBLB) was obtained from the left upper lobe
region for further examination. The culture and microscopic examinations of the BALF were also negative. BALF cytology revealed periodic
acid-Schiff stain-positive bodies, phagocytized by macrophages, which was indicative of Cryptococcus spp. (Fig. 2). The cryptococcal antigen
test of the BALF was positive (×2). A histological examination of the TBLB showed granulomatous regions in the lung parenchyma. These
findings confirmed the diagnosis of pulmonary cryptococcosis, and retreatment with 300 mg/day oral FLCZ at our outpatient clinic was
started. Discontinuation of IFX treatment followed. The mass-like region found in the left upper lobe of the lung, however, deteriorated 2
months after restarting FLCZ. A change to antifungal treatment of 200 mg/day itraconazole (ITCZ) combined with 3 g/day flucytosine was
initiated. After the initiation of this treatment, the region of the left upper lobe gradually decreased in size, and finally diminished in
size on chest CT performed 10 months after the relapse (Fig. 3). The patient is presently continuing ITCZ treatment, although at a reduced
dose of 100 mg/day due to the development of mild liver dysfunction. Chest radiography and computed tomography (CT) on relapse. Chest CT
shows a small nodule in the right upper lobe of the lung and a 3×2 cm mass-like region is observed on an air bronchogram. Pictures of
bronchoalveolar lavage fluid cytology (400×). Round bodies suspicious of Cryptococcus spp. phagocytized by macrophages can be seen on
periodic acid-Schiff-stained sections. Clinical course after relapse. IFX: infliximab, FLCZ: fluconazole, ITCZ: itraconazole, 5-FC:
flucytosine. Arrows show IFX administrations. As most cases of pulmonary cryptococcosis are believed to result from the reactivation of a
dormant infection (3), we suspected that our case relapsed from a previous infection. However, we could not rule out the possibility of
reinfection with other strainsof Cryptococcus because the sites of lung lesions differed between the two episodes. Although a genetic
analysis of the pathogens is necessary to confirm whether this case was a relapse or a reinfection, unfortunately, we could not obtain
pathogen specimens at both episodes. According to the guidelines of the Infectious Diseases Society of America, primary antifungal
cryptococcal prophylaxis for human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)-infected patients is not routinely recommended. If the availability of
antiretroviral therapy (ART) is limited, and high levels of antiretroviral drug resistance and disease burden exist, then primary
prophylaxis may be considered (3). Vibhagool et al. reported that secondary prophylaxis for cryptococcal meningitis could be safely
discontinued in HIV-infected patients exhibiting sustained immunological and virologic responses to ART for >3 months after the completion
of a minimum of 12 months of antifungal therapy (4). Six to 12 months of maintenance therapy is recommended (3) for organ transplant or non-
HIV patients. On the other hand, in the Japanese non-HIV population, 6 months of azole treatment is suggested for pulmonary cryptococcosis
patients with underlying diseases (5). Interestingly, our patient had completed 6 months of treatment with FLCZ and experienced relapse >1
year later. In patients with pulmonary tuberculosis, which is also a subacute infectious disease often occurring in patients with impaired
cellular immunity like cryptococcosis, secondary prophylaxis is not required even in patients receiving biological agents if standard
tuberculosis therapy had been performed (6). On the other hand, no sufficient evidence about secondary prophylactic treatment in
cryptococcosis patients with biological agents exists, likely because cryptococcosis is a relatively uncommon infectious disease. The
evidence from this case suggests that it may be safe to continue antifungal agents in conjunction with the administration of biologic
agents. Another interesting point in our patient was the resistance to FLCZ treatment. We considered two hypotheses for this phenomenon. The
first hypothesis is an acquired resistance to FLCZ; however, we could not confirm this, as our patient was culture negative. Bicanic et al.
analyzed relapse cases of HIV-associated cryptococcal meningitis after FLCZ monotherapy and found that 76% of culture-positive relapse cases
were associated with reduced susceptibility to FLCZ (7). The second hypothesis is a paradoxical reaction. The occurrence of paradoxical
responses after the discontinuation of anti-TNF-α agents in patients with tuberculosis infection has been reported (8,9). Our patient's
condition deteriorated between 2 and 3 months after the cessation of infliximab, which is consistent with a paradoxical reaction such as
immune reconstitution inflammatory syndrome seen in HIV patients treated with ART (10,11). To the best of our knowledge, this is the first
case report describing a possible relapse of pulmonary cryptococcosis during treatment with a biological agent. An accumulation of such
cases is necessary to determine the duration of antifungal treatment and the necessity for secondary prophylaxis in these cases.
