Correspondence to Dr. Shinya Kawamoto, kwmt@dokkyomed.ac.jp Medullary cystic kidney disease (MCKD) is a hereditary disease associated with
bilateral medullary polycysts and interstitial fibrosis. MCKD is typically associated with slowly progressive renal dysfunction. We herein
report two rare elderly cases with enlarged kidneys and rapidly progressive renal dysfunction without myeloperoxidase anti-neutrophil
cytoplasmic antibody (MPO-ANCA), PR3-ANCA, or anti-glomerular basement membrane (GBM) antibodies. Renal biopsies revealed extensive tubular
dilatation and atrophy with interstitial fibrosis consistent with MCKD. Both patients began hemodialysis therapy a few months later. Our
cases suggest a MCKD subgroup among elderly patients with an undefined genetic background, rapidly progressive renal dysfunction, and
enlarged kidneys. Nephronophthisis (NPH) and medullary cystic kidney disease (MCKD) are renal diseases associated with bilateral medullary
polycysts and interstitial fibrosis. These two diseases are thought to represent the same disease process according to similar clinical and
pathological features, excluding the age of onset and associated genetic mutations. The concept of juvenile nephronophthisis-medullary
cystic disease complex (NPH-MCKD) has been proposed (1). With the progression of tubular damage, tubular functions, such as sodium
reabsorption and urine concentration, become impaired. Inflammation and fibrosis occurs in the tubulointerstitial area of the kidneys,
ultimately leading to end-stage kidney disease (ESKD). The progression to ESKD is typically gradual, similar to that observed in polycystic
kidney disease. NPH is an autosomal recessive (AR) disease that manifests in early childhood or adolescence and progresses to ESKD in early
adolescence. MCKD is an autosomal dominant (AD) disease that develops in adulthood and slowly progresses to ESKD, characterized by multiple
cysts, measuring 1-20 mm, in the corticomedullary boundary. The clinical features of MCKD are nonspecific and include hypertension,
polyuria, and sodium wasting due to an impairment in urinary concentration (2). The pathological features include expanded urinary ducts in
the corticomedullary boundary areas, diffuse tubulointerstitial nephritis with tubular atrophy, interstitial fibrosis, and an inflammatory
cell infiltrate (3). The kidneys are typically atrophic and decreased in size (4,5). We herein report two cases of MCKD in elderly patients
with enlarged kidneys and a rapid progression to ESKD. Both patients had no apparent genetic history of kidney disease, and their clinical
courses were not typical for traditional hereditary MCKD. An 84-year-old woman had a 3-year history of hypertension, a femoral neck fracture
1 year previously, and a left radial fracture 1 month previously. She had no family history of renal disease or dialysis. She was noted to
have renal dysfunction of unknown etiology 1 year prior to admission. She visited a regional clinic for edema and was observed to have renal
dysfunction [serum creatinine (Cr), 2.7 mg/dL] and anemia 2 months prior to admission. Since that time, she had developed marked edema and
progressive renal dysfunction (serum Cr, 3.7 mg/dL) and was referred to our hospital for further evaluation and treatment. On physical
examination, her temperature was 37.1℃, and her blood pressure was 168/63 mmHg. She showed marked abdominal distention due to ascites and
also had lower extremity edema without dyspnea. Chest radiography revealed cardiac enlargement and bilateral pleural effusions, and an
abdominal computed tomography (CT) scan revealed massive ascites and bilateral kidney enlargement (Fig. 1). The following laboratory results
were obtained: white blood cell (WBC) count, 5,400 WBC/mm3; red blood cells (RBC) count, 250×104 RBC/mm3; hemoglobin (Hb), 8.2 g/dL;
hematocrit (Ht), 24.0%; platelet count (plt), 15.8×104 plt/mm3; total protein (TP), 5.6 g/dL; albumin (Alb), 2.8 g/dL; blood urea nitrogen
(BUN), 45 mg/dL; serum Cr; 3.9 mg/dL; sodium (Na), 140 mEq/L; potassium (K), 3.2 mEq/L; chloride (Cl), 104 mEq/L; C-reactive protein (CRP),
0.5 mg/dL; plasma glucose, 142 mg/dL; hemoglobin A1c (HbA1c), 4.8%; aspartate aminotransferase (AST), 38 IU/L; alanine aminotransferase
(ALT), 18 IU/L; alkaline phosphatase (ALP), 787 IU/L; gamma glutamyl transpeptidase (γGT), 239 IU/L; IgG, 828 mg/dL; IgM, 700 mg/dL; and
IgA, 148 mg/dL. Cryoglobulin was negative and an immunoglobulin (Ig) M (kappa) spike was identified on immunoelectrophoresis. The third
complement component (C3) level was 59 mg/dL (normal 50-130 mg/dL); the fourth component (C4) level was 10.5 mg/dL (normal 10-50 mg/dL);
hemolytic complement activity via the classical pathway (CH50) was 13 U/mL (normal 25.0-48.0 U/mL); and antinuclear antibody (ANA) was
negative. Myeloperoxidase antibodies (MPO), proteinase 3 antibodies (PR3), antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (ANCA), and anti-glomerular
basement membrane (anti-GBM) antibodies were not detected. A urinalysis showed 1.17 g protein/g creatinine and 30-49 RBC/high-power field
(HPF). The urinary β-2 microglobulin (β-2MG) level was 25,150 ng/mL. Bence Jones protein was negative in the urine. A bone marrow aspirate
clot showed hypercellular bone marrow with 3% plasma cells. Computed tomography of the abdomen in case 1. Computed tomography of the abdomen
shows massive ascites and enlarged kidneys with no evidence of cysts. At the time of hospitalization, a percutaneous kidney biopsy was not
performed because of the patient's massive ascites. A percutaneous kidney biopsy was performed 1 month later after several paracentesis
procedures, allowing the patient to lie in a prone position. Histological findings revealed tubular dilatation, primarily involving the
distal tubules, with extensive fibrosis in the interstitium, consistent with nephronophthisis-medullary cystic disease complex(NPH-MCKD).
There were no remarkable glomerular changes except for global sclerosis consistent with the patient's age (Fig. 2). Immune deposits of IgG,
IgA, IgM, C1q, C3, and fibrinogen were absent, despite the IgM kappa M protein detected in the serum. Electron microscopy revealed
irregularities, thinning and disintegration of the tubular basement membrane (TBM). However, it was difficult to explain the patient's
massive ascites and rapidly progressive renal dysfunction according to the histological findings. Renal biopsy findings in case 1. (a)
periodic acid-Schiff (PAS) stain; magnification 10×; (b) PAS stain; 200×. Light microscopy images show tubular dilatation and atrophy.
Cystic tubules show irregularities and thinning of the tubular epithelial cells. The glomeruli show global sclerosis and arterial intimal
thickening, consistent with the patient's age, without any other remarkable changes such as crescent formation. Considering her advanced age
(84 years of age) and symptomatic relief after paracentesis, no further investigation was done and she was discharged with a serum Cr level
of 5.1 mg/dL 2 months after admission. She began hemodialysis therapy 1 month after discharge. A 74-year-old woman was started on
antihypertensive therapy 1 year prior to admission when she was noted to have a mild renal impairment with a serum Cr level of 1.1 mg/dL.
She was status post-appendectomy at 20 years of age, had a history of ulcerative colitis with rectal cancer at 61 years of age, and a
cataract at 68 years of age. She had no family history of renal disease or dialysis. Although her blood pressure was well controlled, her
serum Cr level rapidly increased to 1.5 mg/dL at 3 months after the start of antihypertensive therapy and 2.4 mg/dL at 5 months after the
start of therapy. She was subsequently referred to our hospital for further evaluation and treatment. On physical examination, her
temperature was 36.5℃, and her blood pressure was 150/79 mmHg. Her conjunctivae were pale and she had lower extremity edema. The following
laboratory results were obtained: WBC count, 6,800 WBC/mm3; RBC count, 248×104 RBC/mm3; Hb, 7.3 g/dL; Ht, 21.7%; Plt, 18.2×104/mm3; TP, 7.1
g/dL; Alb, 4.1 g/dL; BUN, 30 mg/dL; Cr, 3.6 mg/dL; Na, 138 mEq/L; K, 5.3 mEq/L; Cl, 107 mEq/L; CRP, 0.21 mg/dL; plasma glucose, 107 mg/dL;
HbA1c, 5.1%; IgG, 1,326 mg/dL; IgM, 76 mg/dL; IgA, 239 mg/dL; C3, 91 mg/dL; C4, 24.7 mg/dL; and CH50, 13 U/mL. Cryoglobulin was negative.
ANA was negative, and MPO, PR3, ANCA, and anti-GBM were not detected. A urinalysis showed 1.23 g protein/g creatinine and 6 RBC/HPF. Urinary
β-2MG was 27,708 ng/mL. Abdominal CT showed bilateral kidney enlargement that was not seen on an earlier CT exam 1 year previously. Serial
CT images are shown in Fig. 3. Magnetic resonance images (MRI) are shown in Fig. 4. MRI, including coronal magnetic resonance images, did
not reveal multiple microcysts in the enlarged kidneys, however, a careful observation revealed multiple cysts along the corticomedullary
boundary. Serial changes of abdominal computed tomography (CT) at (a) 2 years prior to admission, (b) 1 year prior to admission and (c) at
admission in case 2. There is no evidence of kidney enlargement at 2 or 1 year prior to admission; however, CT at admission shows kidney
enlargement compared with the previous CT scans. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the abdomen: (a) axial section of the abdomen
(T1-weighted image) and (b) coronal section of the abdomen (T2-weighted image) in case 2. No apparent microcysts are seen in the enlarged
kidneys, including the coronal images, however, a closer observation shows multiple cysts along the corticomedullary boundary in the left
kidney in the coronal section (arrows) (b). A percutaneous renal biopsy was performed on day 2. Of seven glomeruli, two were globally
sclerotic, one was segmentally sclerotic, and two showed glomerular cysts. The other glomeruli were essentially normal. The distal tubules
were also dilated, consistent with MCKD, and there was mild interstitial fibrosis and inflammatory cell infiltration (Fig. 5). Electron
microscopy revealed irregular layering, spheroidizing, thinning, and partial rupture of the TBM. The patient was treated with
corticosteroids [prednisolone (PSL) 30 mg/day] in view of the significantly elevated urinary β-2MG level and interstitial cell infiltration.
Immediately after PSL administration, a slight reduction in the serum Cr level was noted and her anemia improved. However, the serum Cr
level gradually increased and the Hb level gradually decreased 2 months later, when PSL was tapered. Three months after the start of PSL
therapy, the patient developed gastrointestinal bleeding and was found to have a serum Cr level of 7 mg/dL. The gastrointestinal bleed may
have been an adverse effect of PSL therapy. However, no apparent bleeding source was detected by gastroscopy, colonoscopy, or enteroscopy.
Anemia was corrected with blood transfusions, however, the patient's renal function did not improve and she began hemodialysis therapy 5
months after referral. Renal biopsy findings in case 2. (a) periodic acid-methenamine-silver (PAM) stain; original magnification 10×, (b)
PAS stain original magnification 200×. Light microscopy images show tubular dilatation and atrophy. Cystic tubules show irregularities and
thinning of the tubular epithelial cells. Of seven glomeruli, two are globally sclerotic, one is segmentally sclerotic, and two show
glomerular cysts. The other glomeruli are intact. We also performed immunohistochemical staining in both cases for CD10, cytokeratin 7
(CK7), epithelial membrane antigen (EMA), E-cadherin, and cytokeratin (34 beta E12) to identify the level of tubular dilatation (Fig. 6). In
case 1, the dilated tubules were negative for CD10, a marker of proximal tubules (6). In contrast, immunostaining results for CK7, EMA, and
E-cadherin, markers of the distal tubules and collecting ducts, were positive. Immunostaining results for CK (34 beta E12), a marker of
collecting ducts, were also positive (7), indicating that the cysts predominantly arose from collecting ducts in case 1. In case 2, the
dilated tubules were positive for CK7 and EMA and weakly positive for E-cadherin and CK (34 beta E12). Immunohistochemical findings in both
cases. Immunohistochemical staining for CD10, cytokeratin 7 (CK7), epithelial membrane antigen (EMA), E-cadherin, and cytokeratin (34 beta
E12) in the interstitium of both cases. Original magnification 10×. The tubular basement membrane (TBM) of dilated tubules in both cases is
negative for CD10. In case 1, the TBM of dilated tubules is positive for CK7, EMA, E-cadherin, and CK (34 beta E12). In case 2, the TMB of
dilated tubules is positive for CK7 and EMA and weakly positive for E-cadherin and CK (34 beta E12). NPH-MCKD is a hereditary disease of the
renal tubules, which are important for the reabsorption of sodium and the concentration of urine. Typically, interstitial inflammation and
fibrosis occurs, slowly progressing to ESKD, similar to the progression seen in polycystic kidney disease. The genetic mutations associated
with NPH-MCKD are shown in Table 1 (8-17). Gene Mutations Associated with NPH-MCKD. AR: Autosomal Recessive, AD: Autosomal Dominant
Recently, a human genetic condition termed “ciliopathy” has been proposed. Ciliopathy is thought to be caused by a dysfunction of two
functionally and physically associated organelles, the centromere and the cilium. Autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease (ADPKD) and
NPH-MCKD are thought to be related to renal cilia dysfunction (ciliopathy), and more than 30 different genetic mutations have been localized
to the cilia and/or centromeres (18,19). NPH is inherited in an AR manner. The disease onset occurs in early childhood or adolescence and
typically progresses to ESKD during adolescence. On the other hand, MCKD is an AD disease. Its onset occurs during adulthood and slowly
progresses to ESKD with the formation of multiple cysts, measuring 1-20 mm, in the corticomedullary boundary. The kidneys usually decrease
in size and become atrophic. There is currently no effective treatment to prevent progression; sodium supplementation and erythropoietin are
used for symptomatic relief. Two types of MCKD are recognized (MCKD1 and MCKD2) according to the localizing chromosome and the onset of
ESKD. MCKD1 progresses more slowly than MCKD2 and has a later onset of ESKD (average age 62 years old; range, 50-70 years). The average age
of onset of ESKD in MCKD2 is 32 years (range, 16-54 years). Genetic mutations are known to affect mucoprotein mucin-1 (MUC1) in MCKD1 and
uromodulin (UMOD) in MCKD2 (10). The initial symptoms are polydipsia and polyuria due to decreased urine concentration and sodium loss. The
urinalysis is normal early in the disease. Generally, there is a slow progression to ESKD, similar to the progression seen in polycystic
kidney disease. The typical CT, MRI, and ultrasound images in MCKD show atrophic kidneys with multiple cysts in the medulla, particularly at
the corticomedullary junction (4,5). The differential diagnosis of kidney enlargement includes infiltrative diseases (hematopoietic
malignancy, sarcoidosis, and amyloidosis), autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease, early stage diabetic nephropathy, acute
interstitial nephritis, and pyelonephritis (20). In the present cases, an immunohistological investigation revealed numerous microcysts
within the dilated distal tubules and collecting ducts, compatible with MCKD. We postulate that these renal microcysts rapidly developed and
replaced the renal parenchyma with tubulointerstitial inflammation, a finding rarely seen in MCKD. The cyst formation and subsequent
inflammation played a pivotal role in the pathogenesis of the kidney enlargement and dysfunction. We have found similar case reports from
Japan (21-23). These cases, including ours, are summarized in Table 2. All five of these cases showed renal enlargement and MCKD-like
tubulointerstitial changes with a rapid progression to ESKD. However, there are no previous reports of patients with massive ascites and
rapidly progressive renal failure in MCKD. Taneda et al. also reported a similar case in an elderly patient who was not clinically
diagnosed, but had been diagnosed at autopsy with ARPKD according to the renal morphology. The case reported by Taneda et al. also showed
renal enlargement and a rapid progression to ESKD in the absence of any apparent genetic mutation. The diagnosis of ARPKD was made according
to the presence of liver involvement, including hepatic cysts, jaundice, and elevated liver enzyme levels, findings not typically observed
in MCKD (24). Summary of Similar Cases Reported in Japan. Because these other cases were reported mainly from Japan, it appears that these
diseases are not due to regional or racial differences or a new disease type, unlike traditional hereditary MCKD. A greater accumulation of
similar cases with genetic and histopathological analyses is important to further our understanding of this disease entity. We herein
reported two unusual cases that presented with rapidly progressive renal dysfunction, renal enlargement, and acute interstitial injury. The
pathological findings were consistent with MCKD, however, the patients had no family history of renal disease. Similar cases, lacking the
genetic findings of traditional hereditary MCKD, have been reported in Japan. Further pathological and clinical investigations of future
cases are required.
