Correspondence to Dr. Rie Tadokoro, rietado@med.showa-u.ac.jp The patient was a 61-year-old woman who had a well-differentiated pancreatic
neuroendocrine tumor (PNET) with lymph node metastasis. After 15 months of octreotide treatment, glucose control deteriorated and
pigmentation of the tongue and moon face developed, leading to the diagnosis of ectopic adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) syndrome. An
abnormal secretion of growth hormone (GH) was identified, and the plasma growth hormone-releasing hormone (GHRH) level was elevated. A tumor
biopsy specimen positively immunostained for ACTH and GHRH. Ectopic hormone secretion seems to have evolved along with the progression of
the PNET. Pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors (PNETs) are derived from neuroendocrine cells of the pancreas. Tumors that synthesize and secrete
biologically active hormones are called functional neuroendocrine tumors and all others are called non-functional neuroendocrine tumors (1).
An epidemiological study conducted in Japan revealed the prevalence of PNET to be 2.23 per 100,000 people. Non-functional tumors were the
most frequent, constituting 47.4% of all cases (2). The most frequent functional PNETs were insulinoma (38.2%) and gastrinoma (7.9%);
glucagonoma and somatostatinoma were rare, with frequencies of 2.6 and 0.7%, respectively (2). Ectopic adrenocorticotropic hormone
(ACTH)-producing and growth hormone-releasing hormone (GHRH)-producing tumors are both very rare types of PNET. We herein report a case of
ACTH and GHRH producing PNET presenting as Cushing's syndrome and an abnormal secretion of growth hormone (GH), following an initial
diagnosis of a non-functional neuroendocrine tumor. The patient was a 61-year-old woman who became aware of abdominal pain in September
2009. A mass measuring 6 cm in diameter was noted in her pancreas (Fig. 1A). A biopsy of the pancreas was performed, and the diagnosis of a
well-differentiated neuroendocrine tumor was made (Fig. 2A). The percentage of Ki67-positive cells was 11.5% (Fig. 2B), and these findings
were consistent with the diagnosis of NET G2 (3). Since symptoms suggesting excessive hormone secretion, such as hypoglycemia, were lacking
and the serum levels of insulin, gastrin and glucagon were all within the normal reference ranges (17.4 μIU/mL, 80 pg/mL, and 130 pg/mL,
respectively), the patient was diagnosed as having a non-functional PNET. The results of other blood examinations were as follows: leukocyte
count 4,700 /μL, eosinophil fraction 0%, lymphocyte fraction 33%, serum potassium level 3.8 mEq/L, and serum albumin level 4.1 g/dL.
Although the eosinophil fraction was found to have decreased, the overall results, along with a lack of Cushingoid features on physical
examination, were not indicative of hypercortisolemia. Due to the presence of distant lymph node metastases, surgery was not indicated, and
instead, treatment with octreotide LAR 20 mg/month was initiated and continued. Computed tomography of the abdomen. An enhanced pancreatic
tumor with metastasis to the para-aortic lymph nodes was demonstrated. A) Beginning of December, 2009. B) End of September, 2011.
Pathological examination of the pancreatic tumor. A) Well-differentiated neuroendocrine tumor (Hematoxylin and Eosin staining). B) The
percentage of Ki67 positive cells was 11.5%. C) Positive immunostaining for ACTH. D) Positive immunostaining for GHRH. ACTH:
adrenocorticotropic hormone, GHRH: growth hormone-releasing hormone In March 2011, the patient was admitted to our hospital to be treated
for diabetes mellitus (HbA1c 9.9%). The plasma level of ACTH (192.9 pg/mL; reference range, 7.2-63.3) was elevated, but the serum levels of
cortisol (10.4 μg/dL; 4.5-21.1), GH (0.99 ng/mL; ≤3.61), and insulin-like growth factor-1 (IGF-1) (85 ng/mL; 37-150) were within the normal
reference ranges. In April 2011, the patient developed pigmentation of the tongue, and then moon face in the following month, leading to the
suspicion of Cushing's syndrome. In September 2011, levels of ACTH, cortisol, GH and IGF-1 were elevated to 249.1 pg/mL, 17.6 μg/dL, 11.6
ng/mL, and 148 ng/mL, respectively. The patient was re-admitted to our department. The patient had no family history of multiple endocrine
neoplasia (MEN) or any other endocrine disorders. On admission, her height was 147.5 cm and weight 45.15 kg. Her blood pressure was 140/86
mmHg and body temperature was 36.5℃. Moon face and pigmentation of the tongue were noted. Clinical features of acromegaly were lacking. A
left supraclavicular lymph node was palpable. The patient's general laboratory data are shown in Table 1. Hypokalemia, and elevated fasting
glucose and HbA1c levels were noted. Plasma ACTH was as high as 205.9 pg/mL, and the urinary excretion of cortisol had also increased.
General Laboratory Data. VIP: vasoactive intestinal peptide, DHEA-S: dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate, GH: growth hormone, IGF-1: insulin-like
growth factor-1, PRL: prolactin, TSH: thyroid stimulating hormone, FSH: follicle stimulating hormone, LH: luteinizing hormone, UFC: urinary
free cortisol excretion Endocrinological examinations revealed the lack of any diurnal changes in ACTH and cortisol levels, and those levels
were not suppressed in response to the overnight dexamethasone (8 mg) suppression test (Table 2). The plasma ACTH levels did not respond to
an intravenous corticotrophin-releasing hormone challenge. These results were consistent with the diagnosis of ectopic ACTH-producing
syndrome. The serum GH levels were modestly elevated (Tables 1, 22) despite hyperglycemia, and paradoxically responded to an intravenous
thyrotropin-releasing hormone (TRH) challenge (Table 2). The plasma levels of GHRH were as high as 9,230.4 pg/mL (reference range, 4 ~14)
(4) (Table 1). Endocrinology Examinations. DST: dexamethasone suppression test, CRH: corticotrophin-releasing hormone, TRH: thyrotropin-
releasing hormone Pituitary magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed no abnormalities. Computed tomography (CT) of the abdomen revealed a
progressive enlargement of the pancreatic tumor with metastases to the para-aortic lymph nodes (Fig. 1B). No liver metastasis was observed,
but the decrease in visceral and subcutaneous and fat area was apparent as compared to the previous CT (Fig. 1). Re-examination of the
biopsied specimen of pancreatic tissue obtained at first diagnosis revealed positive immunostaining for ACTH (Fig. 2C) and GHRH (Fig. 2D).
Octreotide LAR was continued, and metyrapone was administered to reduce hypercortisolemia. However, the tumors gradually increased in size.
The patient was hospitalized in May 2012 for cholecystitis and peritonitis and was treated at that time by intraperitoneal drainage.
Subsequently, the tumor perforated into the intestine, and palliative care was begun. In the fall of 2012, the patient died; an autopsy was
not performed. In this case, genetic testing for MEN type 1 (MEN-1) and related abnormalities was not performed. Initially, the present
patient appeared to have a non-functioning PNET, but from the findings of deterioration of glucose control, tongue pigmentation and moon
face, the diagnosis of ectopic ACTH-producing syndrome was made. In addition, an abnormal secretion of GH was demonstrated, possibly due to
ectopic GHRH secretion. Immunostaining of the pancreatic specimen obtained at first diagnosis suggested that the PNET had been producing and
secreting these hormones simultaneously. In the present case, because the clinical features of Cushing's syndrome or acromegaly were lacking
at first presentation, detailed investigations were not performed at that time. Along with the progressive enlargement of the tumor (Fig.
1), clinical manifestations of Cushing's syndrome and an abnormality of GH secretion became apparent. It is conceivable that there may have
been a subtle hormone excess at the initial presentation, and that the increase in tumor mass could have resulted in the development of more
apparent manifestations of hormone excess. Neuroendocrine tumors often produce and secrete multiple hormones (2). However, tumors
simultaneously producing GHRH and ACTH are very rare. Only five cases have been reported, as far as we could determine based on a search of
the pertinent literature (5-9), and the present case is the second reported case derived from a primary pancreatic tumor (Table 3).
Cushingoid features were evident in all these cases, but features of acromegaly were present in only two cases. It is conceivable that some
PNETs may simultaneously produce GHRH and ACTH on a subclinical level, as this phenomenon has not yet been thoroughly investigated. Ectopic
Secretion of ACTH and GHRH by a Neuroendocrine Tumor: 6 Patients. The last case is the present case. In ectopic ACTH syndrome cases, small-
cell carcinoma of the lung is most frequently observed, and pancreatic tumors account for only 10% of the cases (10). In cases of ectopic
ACTH syndrome caused by PNET, many are aggressive and the prognosis is poor (11,12). In ectopic ACTH syndrome, increased visceral fat
associated with hypercortisolemia is observed in slowly progressive cases, whereas weight loss and cachexia are prominent features in
rapidly progressive cases of tumors, such as small-cell carcinoma of the lung (10). In the present case, the progressive clinical course
precluded some of the more common physical manifestations of hypercortisolemia; indeed, findings of decreased visceral and subcutaneous fat
(Fig. 1B) were accompanied by the progression of ectopic ACTH syndrome. Ectopic acromegaly caused by GHRH-producing tumors is rare. To the
best of our knowledge, only 74 (13) and 99 (14) cases have been reported previously. Primary tumors are most commonly found in the lung,
followed by the pancreas, with frequency of 25% (13) or 33% (14). Other tumors include those of the digestive tract, pheochromocytomas, and
tumors of the thymus. Most of the reported cases of ectopic acromegaly were detected and diagnosed due to clinically evident acromegalic
features of varying intensity. The reported latent period to display clinical signs of active acromegaly was as long as 8.3 years (14).
However, some of these tumors had modest levels of GHRH production and secretory functions. Such cases may not develop acromegaly due to
modest GHRH production and secretion, or no GHRH secretion despite GHRH production (13). In patients with ectopic acromegaly, the serum GH
levels after an oral glucose challenge may show a paradoxical increase, and those levels often display a paradoxical increase to a TRH
challenge (14,15). In the present case also, the serum GH levels were not suppressed despite hyperglycemia, and a TRH challenge revealed a
paradoxical GH increase. These results are clinically consistent with acromegaly, but no clinical features of acromegaly were present in
this patient. This may have been due to the short duration of the disease. Mutations in the MEN1 gene are found in approximately 10% of
functional PNET cases (2). However, this was unlikely in the present case because of the absence of any findings suggesting
hyperparathyroidism, the normal pituitary MRI findings, and the lack of a family history of endocrine disorders; therefore, genetic testing
for MEN-1 was not performed. In conclusion, in cases of PNET, it appears to be important to carry out detailed investigations to reveal the
entire extent of endocrinology disturbances.
