Adenomas of the colon are usually benign tumors which carry a tendency for malignancy. These tumors can be villous, tubular, tubulovillous,
or sessile serrated. Those with adenomatous structure can develop malignant characteristics in 1.5% to 9.4% of cases. We present a case
report of a 16-year-old female adolescent with an adenoma of the descending colon. History revealed prolonged diarrheic syndrome for the
past 6 months, repeated headache, and a weight loss of ∼5 kg in the past month. One week before the admission, the patient presented an
episode of inferior digestive hemorrhage. On admission laboratory tests revealed iron deficiency anemia, and a mildly increased erythrocyte
sedimentation rate. The abdominal ultrasound revealed an inhomogeneous mass of the descending colon and 2 hyperechoic lesions in the liver.
The colonoscopy showed a tumor of the descending colon, a tubular adenoma according to the pathological examination. Additionally, we noted
an atypical presentation of the tumor and the signs of mild dysplasia identified at the pathological examination. Weight loss, bowel transit
alterations, loss of appetite, and inferior hemorrhage in an adolescent can be symptoms of a benign or malignant tumor of the colon. Adenoma
of the colon is a type of polyp, usually of benign nature, formed by glandular tissue. Depending on the pattern of growth these tumors can
be villous, tubular, tubulovillous, or sessile serrated. In comparison to nonadenomatous polyps, those with adenomatous structure can
develop malignant characteristics. According to clinical, pathological, and epidemiological data, the incidence of adenocarcinomas of the
colon developing from adenomas is approximately 1.5% to 9.4%, and the transformation process can take between 8 and 10 years, being mainly
related to their size, morphology, and pathological type. Usually, these benign tumors appear in the rectosigmoid area, and very rarely in
the proximal colon. Between 2% and 15% of cases can present the coexistence of adenomas and adenocarcinomas, in addition to juvenile polyps.
Hereditary polyposis syndromes represent another important clinical context that should be taken under consideration by every physician in
order to properly evaluate a patient with polyps. Among these hereditary conditions, we recall familial adenomatous polyps which are usually
asymptomatic during the first decade of life, the condition being characterized by >100 adenomatous colonic polyps involving the entire
gastrointestinal tract. Another hereditary polyposis syndrome worth mentioning is the Peutz–Jeghers syndrome, a rare inherited autosomal
dominant condition defined by the association between mucocutaneous pigmentation, hamartomatous polyposis, and a high risk of cancer
development. The most frequent clinical presentation in benign colon tumors is inferior digestive hemorrhage, but symptoms of partial bowel
occlusion can also be associated. The diagnosis is established by colonoscopy, and the type of the tumor is identified by pathological
examination. The colonoscopy must be extended to the entire colon in order to exclude the presence of multiple adenomas. Treatment usually
consists in resection through colonoscopy. The follow-up for multiple adenomas, those with increased size or with signs of dysplasia,
includes a colonoscopy at 6 months after the removal of the tumor, even though a study that evaluated the recurrence rate within the 3 years
after the removal of the polyp showed a rate of 21.3% in case of enlarged size (over 15 mm) tumors. We present a case report with the aim of
revealing the clinical symptoms that can suggest the presence of a colonic tumor, which can be malignant or nonmalignant. Informed consent
was obtained from the patient's mother (legal guardian) for publication of this case report. A 16 years and 11 months old female adolescent
was referred to our clinic due to the fact that she presented weight loss (∼5 kg in the previous month), prolonged diarrheic syndrome (in
the past 6 months), repeated headache, and an episode of inferior digestive hemorrhage 1 week before admission. The family history revealed
the fact that the maternal grandfather died of rectal carcinoma. The pathological elements revealed by the clinical examination performed on
admission were as follows: pallor of the skin and mucosa, painful abdomen at palpation in the left side and iliac fossa, where a solid,
adherent mass, of ∼3 cm in diameter was observed. Associated symptoms were loss of appetite and stools with modified consistency. The
laboratory tests revealed iron deficiency anemia (Hb 9.2 g/dL, Htc 29.8%, Iron 4.62 μmol/L) and a mildly increased erythrocyte sedimentation
rate: 19 mm/h. The abdominal ultrasound revealed an inhomogeneous lesion at the level of the descending colon, with presence of Doppler
signal, sized ∼6.9/4.9 cm, and in the left lobe of the liver we noticed 2 hyperechoic lesions of ∼6.5/6.4, and 5.3/4.3 mm, respectively,
well delimitated, without Doppler signal (Figs. 1 and 2). Taking under consideration the clinical presentation and the laboratory findings,
it was mandatory to exclude the following conditions in order to establish a proper diagnosis: fecaloma or different types of tumors such
as: intestinal lymphoma, retroperitoneal tumor, mesenteric giant cyst, and kidney tumor. Aspect of the colonic tumor at abdominal
ultrasound. Aspect of the 2 hyperechoic lesions in the liver at ultrasonography. The inferior digestive endoscopy showed a lobular tumor in
the descending colon, which bled easily, with white nodules in the colonic mucosa surrounding the tumor (Figs. 3 and 4). We took multiple
biopsies from the tumor and the surrounding mucosa in order to perform a pathological examination. We also examined the entire large bowel
to exclude the presence of other tumors. Endoscopic aspect of the tumor. Endoscopic aspect of giant polip. Due to the fact that clinically
and paraclinically this tumor presented certain features of malignancy, such as weight loss, intestinal transit disorders, anemia, and the 2
hyperechoic hepatic lesions which could suggest liver metastases, we performed an abdominal and pelvic CT where we noticed an intracavitary
space-replacing process in the descending colon, with stenosis characteristics, of ∼30/29/53 mm in size, without obvious involvement of the
adipose subserous tissue, inhomogeneous iodophil; in the liver, we observed a focal image with a size of 3 mm, hypovascularized after
contrast application, aspect suggestive for hepatic hemangioma (Figs. 5 and 6). We also performed an EEG exam which pointed out focal
modifications; therefore, we performed a cerebral MRI in order to reveal a possible expansive intracerebral process, but fortunately it was
normal. We additionally requested serum copper, carcinoembryonic antigen, and alpha-fetoprotein determination but all were in normal range.
The pathological examination revealed epithelial proliferation, with tubular architecture, covered by a pseudostratified epithelium, with
enlarged, hyperchromic nuclei and aspect of mild (low degree) dysplasia and vascular congestion. The proliferation index Ki67 was positive
on the surface and in the subjacent tubular structures. The pathological examination of the surrounding colonic mucosa revealed only
lymphoid agglomerations, without activity phenomena. Thus, the pathological examination revealed the tumor mass to be tubular adenoma of the
colon, with mild dysplasia. Abdominal CT aspect of the descending colon tumor (sagittal section). Abdominal CT aspect of the descending
colon tumor (coronal section). The treatment consisted in removal of the adenoma during colonoscopy trough electrocauterization. The
pathological examination performed after the removal of the entire adenoma showed no additional information. The evolution of our patient
was without unexpected or unfavorable events. We recommended another colonoscopy after 6 months due to the unusual localization of the
adenoma, its large size, and also the signs of mild dysplasia revealed by the pathological examination. Adenomatous polyps of the colon are
premalignant lesions, with a 1.5% to 9.4% incidence of developing into adenocarcinomas, the process of malignant transformation having a
variable length, between 8 and 10 years. Even though the rate of oncogenesis process is not very frequent, cases of adenocarcinomas in
children have been reported, between the age of 9 months and the age of 15 years. Recently, a case of a 17-year-old male adolescent who
presented recurrent abdominal pain, nausea and mildly loose stools was described, similar to our patient, and who was diagnosed with
adenocarcinoma of the ascending colon. The risk of malignancy increases with the size of the polyp; therefore, those with an increased size
carry a higher risk of malignant transformation, and also a family history of colon cancer leads to an increased susceptibility toward
developing adenocarcinomas. Our patient had a positive family history for rectal cancer, and also the adenoma was giant, bigger than 2 cm,
similarly to those defined by other studies. In a study performed by Andrade DO on 233 children, in 2 reference centers, 74% were identified
with juvenile polyps, among 35% with intestinal polyposis syndromes. Familial adenomatous polyposis, defined by innumerous adenomatous
polyps in the entire gastrointestinal tract, is usually diagnosed in a context of a positive familial history. Even though the adenomatous
polyposis coli (APC) gene seems to be involved in the development of familial adenomatous polyposis, “new mutations” have also been
described in up to 30% of patients with this condition, the average age of cancer development being 29 years. Juvenile polyposis syndrome is
an autosomal dominant condition, characterized by multiple juvenile polyps that can occur in the entire gastrointestinal tract, but are more
often in the colon. Up to 60% of patients with this condition have been identified with genetic mutations, involving the SMAD4 or BMPR1A
genes. The risk of developing cancer is also present in patients with juvenile polyposis syndrome, especially in the third decade of life.
The Peutz–Jeghers syndrome, characterized by the association between mucocutaneous pigmentation, hamartomatous polyposis and an increased
risk of cancer development is caused by a germ-line mutation in the STK11 gene, located on chromosome 19. Patients diagnosed with this
disorder present a high risk for developing not only gastrointestinal cancer, but also ovarian, testicular, breast, pancreas, lung, and
uterine cervix neoplasms. In most cases the location of these tumors is the rectosigmoid. However, one-third develop in the descending
colon, proximal to the splenic flexure, similar to our case, with only 12% appearing in the proximal colon. The most frequent symptoms
developed by patients diagnosed with colonic polyps are rectal bleeding, prolapsing rectal mass, abdominal pain, mucopurulent discharge,
diarrhea, and vomiting, even though cases of asymptomatic patients have been reported. Our patient presented only 1 episode of rectal
bleeding, but she also complained of prolonged diarrhea. A study performed on 1537 asymptomatic patients showed a prevalence of advanced
neoplasia, which included cancer or a tubular adenoma, traditional serrated adenoma or sessile serrated adenoma with villous
characteristics, and/or high-grade dysplasia and/or diameter ≥10 mm, of 6.8%. The treatment is usually electrocautery removal performed
through colonoscopy, like in our case. A rare, but important complication of giant polyps can be intussusception, as in the 2 cases
presented by Avandipo. Other complications encountered in the case of undiagnosed or untreated polyps can be prolonged diarrhea, as in the
case we presented above, anemia through repeated blood loss in the stools and even bowel occlusion in very rare cases. The early diagnosis
is essential due to the risk of degeneration into a malignant process. Prior studies showed that the recurrence of a single polyp is usually
rare. However, more recent studies underline that there is a rate of 17% for the recurrence of single polyps. Also, it seems that the degree
of dysplasia together with the number and size of the adenoma are important factors in the prediction of the recurrence rate. Therefore,
according to a study performed on 3360 patients, the recurrence rate within the 3 years after polypectomy was 4.2% in the case of a single
polyp with the size ≤ 15 mm, without high-grade dysplasia. With regard to patients with colorectal adenomas, the same study underlined a
recurrence rate of 21.3% in patients with colorectal adenomas without high-grade dysplasia and > 15 mm, or in those with high-grade
dysplasia and ≤ 15 mm, and also in the case of multiple adenomas without high-grade dysplasia and ≤ 15 mm, although the percentage raised to
57.9% in the case of high-grade dysplasia > 15 mm. Therefore, we can speculate that our patient has a recurrence risk of 21.3%. Also in the
same study, in the 746 patients with colorectal adenomas, the median tumor size was 16 mm, ranging between 8 and 34 mm, smaller that the
adenoma discovered in our patient. The surveillance of families with adenomas includes an yearly screening colonoscopy, beginning with the
age of 10 to 12 years. Due to these facts, we think it is appropriate to repeat the colonoscopy in our patient after 6 months. Additionally,
we noted an atypical presentation of the tumor and the signs of mild dysplasia identified at the pathological examination. Weight loss,
bowel transit alterations, loss of appetite, and inferior hemorrhage in an adolescent can be symptoms of a benign or malignant tumor of the
colon. Abbreviations: APC = adenomatous polyposis coli, CT = computer tomography, EEG = electroencephalography, ESR = erythrocyte
sedimentation rate, Hb = hemoglobin, Htc = hematocrit, MRI = magnetic resonance imaging. The authors have no funding and conflicts of
interest to disclose.
