Tetramine (tetramethylene disulphotetramine, TETS) and fluoroacetamide (FAA) are known as illegal rodenticides with high toxicity to animal
species and human beings, which could lead to severe clinical features, including reduction of consciousness, convulsions, coma, and even
death. We presented 2 cases that involved rodenticides poisoning. Even though the patients showed severe manifestations, they were initially
misdiagnosed, resulting in 2 persons finally died from TETS and FAA poisoning in homicide cases. From the clinical and forensic experience
of these 2 cases, we suggest that physicians should consider TETS and FAA poisoning when patients present generalized seizures, especially
in some cases without clear cause and diagnosis of disease. Early diagnosis and treatment are essential for positive management and criminal
investigation in intentional poisoning cases. Moreover, clinical toxicology education should be reinforced. Tetramine (tetramethylene
disulphotetramine, TETS) and fluoroacetamide (FAA) have been banned worldwide due to their high toxicity to animal species and human beings.
However, they remain available and responsible for intentional or unintentional poisoning cases in China and other countries. It is reported
that there were about 3500 persons, including 225 fatalities, involving TETS poisoning in mainland China from 2001 to 2012. In northeast and
central China, TETS and FAA were commonly found in the rodenticide-related poisoning cases. Both of them have an extremely low lethal dose.
However, 7.0 to 10.0 mg TETS is considered lethal for human beings and approximate lethal oral dose of FAA is 30 mg. The most common route
of exposure to TETS and FAA is ingestion, though occupational exposures through inhalation and skin contact occur occasionally. At present,
TETS or FAA poisoning patients are rare in clinic. The physicians may initially miss the diagnosis of intoxication due to lack of both
information of the toxicant intake and clinical/medical toxicology education (especially in China). Here we presented 2 cases in which
patients displayed typical manifestations of TETS and FAA poisoning but finally died due to misdiagnosis. Ethical approval was not necessary
because the study was focused on the retrospective observations of patient's hospital courses and criminal investigation files from police,
which in no way affected their treatment. Informed consent was obtained from the patient's relative (in case 1) and the patient (in case 2)
for publication of their data and materials. A 52-year-old, previously healthy male who suffered from sudden convulsion for 3 hours was
admitted in intensive care unit (ICU). The patient was suddenly unconscious around 8:30 am after breakfast. He was found foaming, limb
stiffness, and urinary incontinence. The seizure lasted 5 to 7 minutes each episodes along with the interval of 20 to 30 minutes. Physical
examination: the patient was in a coma, T:37.0°C, HR: 98 bpm, BP: 123/87 mm Hg. Neurological examination: Babinski sign (+) on his right
foot. Computer tomography (CT) scan and electroencephalogram (EEG) were unremarkable and electrocardiograph (ECG) showed sinus tachycardia.
Serology assay on the day of admission revealed ALT:64 IU/L, AST:39 IU/L, CK: 230 U/L, LDH: 55U/L, HBDH: 321U/L, CK-MB: 44 U/L, cnT
∼0.1 μg/L. The cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) routine test and culture were assessed as negative. Supportive treatments were done and the patient
was discharged with a better health condition without a definite diagnosis. One month later, the patient died suddenly and unexpectedly. The
cause of death was determined as TETS poisoning through the toxicological test. According to the police investigation, the suspect poisoned
the victim with TETS a month ago. Therefore, the patient's blood samples during his hospitalization were sent for the toxicological test
immediately, and the results showed 0.42 μg/mL and 0.35 μg/mL by gas chromatography-mass spectrography (GC-MS), demonstrating TETS poisoning
(see Fig. 1). GC-MS chromatograms of the blood ample in case 1. (A) Gas chromatographic analysis of TETS detected in the blood sample; (B)
scan at m/z 212/240 in the blood sample; (C) full scan mass spectra of TETS in the blood sample. GC-MS = gas chromatography-mass
spectrography, TETS = tetramine or tetramethylenedisulphotetramine. A 48-year-old man was witnessed generalized convulsions and aphasia and
brought to emergency room. His past medical history was unremarkable and free of injuries. Physical examination: The patient was in a coma,
T: 36.7°C, HR 86 bpm, BP 164/100 mmHg, and his myodynamia decreased. Dysphagia and dysphonia observed. The patient's brain CT showed
hypoxic–ischemic changes lightly at hippocampal regions and cerebral cortex. The results of blood routine test, plasmic electrolytes, chest
CT scan, and ECG were unremarkable. The biochemical test showed CK 413.0U/L, ALT 58 U/L, AST 47 U/L, and hematuria observed, indicating
myocardial injuries and dysfunction of liver and renal. The CSF routine test and culture were assessed as negative. Through responsive
treatment, the patient's clinical symptoms disappeared 8 days later without a clear diagnosis. The patient presented similar symptoms twice
in next 4 months. The etiology was not clear until his wife was arrested for poisoning her child to death 6 months later. The suspect
confessed that she intended to poison her husband and put FAA in the daily dishes for several times in last few months. However, her husband
recovered after treatment every time. The blood sample taken from the patient was sent for GC-MS analysis, and the result shown FAA
poisoning with positive of FCH2COO− derivative (1.13 μg/mL) (see Fig. 2). GC-MS chromatograms of the blood ample in case 2. (A) Gas
chromatographic analysis of FCH2COO− derivative detected in the blood sample; (B) scan at m/z 77 in the blood sample; (C) full scan mass
spectra of FCH2COO− derivative in the blood sample. GC-MS = gas chromatography-mass spectrography. TETS, first synthesized in 1949, is a
neural toxin and a noncompetitive blocker of the GABA type A receptor (GABAAR) irreversibly on neuronal cell membranes and blocking chloride
channels (see Fig. 3). This leads to excitation of the central nervous system and induces convulsions. FAA has a lower toxicity than TETS
and could induce convulsion, too. FAA's extreme toxicity stems from blocking the tricarboxylic acid cycle (the Krebs cycle) by combining
with coenzyme A (CoA) to form fluoroacetyl CoA, resulting in an accumulation of citrate and cellular metabolic disorder (see Fig. 4). The
onset of TETS and FAA poisoning symptoms occurs immediately or within a few hours after exposure and develop rapidly. Although mild to
moderate poisoning may induce symptoms such as headache, dizziness, nausea, vomiting, and agitation, in severe cases, patients suffer
generalized clonic–tonic convulsions that may lead to refractory status epilepticus followed by coma, multiorgan failure, and death.
Laboratory tests show that CK, LDH, ALT, AST, creatinine values persistently elevated, and hematuria observed, indicating heart injuries,
liver, and renal dysfunction occurs, with or without ECG/EEG atypical changes. In some FAA poisoning cases, patients developed dysphonia,
dysphagia, and myasthenia, which may be a consequence of central nerve system damage. Toxicological mechanism of TETS on CNS (GABA:
γ-aminobutyric acid; GR: GABA receptor). TETS = tetramine or tetramethylenedisulphotetramine. Lethal synthesis in the toxicological effect
of FAA. FAA = fluoroacetamide. It is difficult to distinguish TETS and FAA poisoning from epilepsy, cerebrovascular accident, myocardial
infraction, or other toxicant poisoning because of their similar clinical features. Unknown history of toxicant intake and lack of
experience of dealing with poisoning cases usually prevent the physician from making correct diagnosis. To confirm the cause of
intoxication, toxicological analysis should be performed using specimens such as vomitus, blood, urine, then detoxification treatment need
to be done. Usually, gastric lavage and activated charcoal treatment were performed to eliminate TETS and FAA, oral administration or
intravenous drip of anticonvulsants such as diazepam alone or combined with sodium valproate to control convulsion. Hemoperfusion and
hemofiltration can reduce mortality and morbidity. For FAA poisoning, correction of hypocalcaemia was necessary by calcium supplementation,
and ethanol, acetate, sodium succinate and sodium 2-ketoglutarate can be used to reduce FAA toxicity. Other supportive treatments, including
preventing organs function failure, maintenance treatment of fluid and electrolyte balance, should be performed in TETS and FAA poisoning.
In conclusion, from the clinical and forensic experience of these 2 cases, we suggest that physicians should consider TETS and FAA poisoning
when they meet patients with generalized seizures, especially in some cases without clear cause and diagnosis of disease. Early diagnosis
and treatment are essential for positive management and very important to criminal investigation. Moreover, clinical toxicology education
should be reinforced. Abbreviations: CSF = cerebrospinal fluid, CT = computer tomography, ECG = electrocardiograph, EEG =
electroencephalogram, FAA = fluoroacetamide, TETS = tetramine or tetramethylenedisulphotetramine. Funding: This work was supported by the
National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 81373243). The authors have no conflicts of interest to disclose.
