We report an unusual and interesting case of non-Hodgkin lymphoma involving 7 extranodal sites. In this case, a 43-year-old woman with
diffuse large B-cell lymphoma, including stomach, breasts, pancreas, adrenal glands, ovary and bones, was confirmed by biopsy and positron
emission tomography/computed tomography scan. The patient achieved a complete response after 2 cycles of chemotherapy with combined
rituximab, cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincristine, and prednisolone, but subsequently developed central nervous system involvement. This
case illustrated the usefulness of positron emission tomography/computed tomography in diagnosis, disease staging, and assessment of
response to therapy. Selection of the optimal treatment regimen is challenging and needs further research. Non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL) arises
primarily in sites other than lymph nodes, including extranodal tissues. Extranodal lymphoma can arise in any organ, and can multifocally
affect 2 or more organs. Here, we present an uncommon and rarely reported disease pattern: a 43-year-old woman with confirmed multifocal
extranodal lymphoma of the stomach, breasts, pancreas, adrenal glands, ovary and bones, followed by central nervous system (CNS)
involvement. The study protocol was reviewed and approved by Ethics Committee of Beijing Hospital. Written informed consent was obtained
from the husband of the patient. A 43-year-old female who had been well until 2 months before presenting as a patient developed mid-
epigastric pain, radiating to the back, weight loss, nausea, and vomiting. She was admitted to our hospital on March 13, 2015. She had no
history of fever or night sweats, or any contributory medical or family history. Her physical examination on admission showed blood
pressure: 112/78 mm Hg; pulse rate: 70/min; respiration rate: 18/min; and body temperature: 36.5°C. Tonsils were not swollen, and palpation
showed no enlargement of cervical, axillary, or inguinal lymph nodes. Intraoral inspection found a solitary swelling involving the mandible
mucosa. Both breasts seemed swollen, but no specific mass was observed. She had direct tenderness on her upper abdomen, without rebound
tenderness, but no hepatomegaly or splenomegaly. Apart from elevated lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) level (1553 U/L [normal: 109–245 U/L]),
β2-microglobulin (4.86 mg/L [normal: 0.7–1.8 mg/L]), amylase (364 U/L [normal: 28–100 U/L]), and low hemoglobin (85 g/L [normal:
110–160 g/L]), laboratory tests, including hepatitis B and C virus and human immunodeficiency virus, were unremarkable. Chest computed
tomography (CT) scans showed no visible masses. Abdominal CT scan showed abnormally thickened gastric walls with perigastric lymph
adenopathy and enlargement of the pancreatic head. Positron emission tomography/computed tomography (PET/CT) scan showed perigastric lymph
adenopathy and multiple hypermetabolic lesions in stomach, pancreas, both breasts, left adrenal gland, left ovary, and multiple bones
including mandibles and femur (Fig. 1). Histopathological examinations of individually performed endoscopic and breast biopsies led to the
diagnosis of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL). Immunohistological examination of tumor cells indicated them as endoscopy: CD20+++,
CD3+, CD10−, Bcl6-, Mum1++, Ki67 (80%), CD21−, AE1/AE3+, CgA−; and breast: CD20+++, CD3+, CD10−, Bcl6+, Mum1+, Ki67 (80%) (Fig. 2A–F). These
findings were consistent with imaging that showed multifocal extranodal DLBCL involving the stomach, breasts, pancreas, adrenal glands,
ovary, and bones. The patient was diagnosed with stage IVB DLBCL and an international prognostic index (IPI) score of 4 (high risk). PET/CT
images. PET/CT scan showed multiple hypermetabolic lesions in both mandible (black arrows), both breasts (white arrows), stomach (black
arrowhead), pancreas (dotted arrow), and left adrenal (white arrowhead). PET/CT = positron emission tomography/computed tomography. H&E
staining and immunohistochemical characteristics of tumor cells. A, D, Hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) staining revealed diffuse infiltration
with large atypical lymphoid cells with prominent nucleoli. A, H&E staining of the endoscopic biopsy (×200). B, CD20-positive malignant
cells from endoscopic biopsy (×100). C, Ki67 strongly positive malignant cells from endoscopic biopsy (×100). D, H&E staining of the breast
biopsy (×100). E, CD20-positive malignant cells from breast biopsy (×100). F, Ki67 strongly positive malignant cells from breast biopsy
(×100). G, H&E staining of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) smear revealed atypical lymphoid cells (×100). H, CD20-positive malignant cells from
CSF (×100). I, Ki67-positive malignant cells from CFS (×100). CSF = cerebrospinal fluid. After 2 chemotherapy cycles (21 days each) of
combined rituximab, cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincristine, and prednisolone (R-CHOP), a follow-up PET/CT scan showed complete metabolic
resolution of lesions in her stomach, breasts, pancreas, adrenal, ovary, and bones, indicating excellent therapeutic efficacy. The
epigastric pain and swelling of her jaw and breasts were evidently relieved. She underwent a third R-CHOP chemotherapy cycle. However, about
4 months after her diagnosis, the patient developed headache, nausea, and vomiting. Although brain MRI and CT scans were normal, PET/CT
showed a hypermetabolic lesion at her T12-L5 vertebral level (Fig. 3). Cerebrospinal fluid cytology indicated that her DLBCL had returned;
immunohistochemistry showed CD79α−, Mum1+, CD20 ++ tumor cells with a highly proliferative Ki67 index (Fig. 2G–I). This patient's symptoms
reflected rapidly increasing intracranial pressure. Sadly, she died after 2 weeks. PET/CT images. After 3 cycles of R-CHOP chemotherapy,
PET/CT scan showed hypermetabolic lesion in T12-L5 vertebral levels of the spinal cord (arrow). DLBCL is the most prevalent NHL subtype.
Extranodal NHL reportedly accounts for approximately one-third of NHL cases, and incidence of extranodal NHL is increasing worldwide,
especially in Western countries. Although extranodal lymphomas are not rare, concurrent involvement of the stomach, breasts, pancreas,
adrenal glands, ovary, and bones in a multifocal extranodal lymphoma is very uncommon. Clinical symptoms of lymphoma are nonspecific. This
patient presented with epigastric pain, weight loss, nausea, vomiting, swollen jaw, and swollen breasts, which were collectively difficult
to differentiate from other benign and malignant lesions. Many of the CT scan and endoscopic findings (such as thickened gastric walls) were
also nonspecific and might have been seen in other common tumors. However, this case showed the imaging features of a rare multifocal
extranodal DLBCL, and highlighted the power of PET/CT scans in assessing the extensive disease involvement. PET/CT scans are also used in
lymphoma to guide biopsies and evaluate treatment response. Ultimately, however, the confirmatory diagnosis was based on pathologic
examination; endoscopic biopsy, breast biopsy, and cerebrospinal fluid cytology played a very important role in the diagnosis of DLBCL.
Treatment strategies for DLBCL patients differ for localized (Ann Arbor stages I–II) and advanced (Ann Arbor stages III–IV) disease, and
also depend on a patient's age, physical condition, histological subtype, comorbidity, burden of disease, and other factors. The R-CHOP
chemotherapy regimen has been the standard treatment for patients with advanced-stage DLBCL. In this case, the patient achieved a complete
response after 2 cycles of R-CHOP chemotherapy. Approximately 20% of patients with systemic lymphoma reportedly develop CNS involvement, and
approximately 95% of CNS lymphoma cases are DLBCL. The increasing incidence of CNS lymphoma may be partly due to immunodeficiency following
multiregimen chemotherapy, but can also be attributed to standard lymphoma regimens (such as CHOP) which fail to penetrate blood–brain
barrier. Moreover, some patients with paranasal sinus involvement or who have 2 or more extranodal sites with elevated LDH are vulnerable to
CNS involvement. Therefore, prophylactic intrathecal injections with high doses of methotrexate and/or cytarabine are recommended for those
patients. CNS progression in NHL patients is associated with pessimistic outcomes. Reported median survival periods for NHL patients with
CNS involvement are, for CNS involvement found at diagnosis: 5.4 months; found at disease recurrence: 3.8 months; and for CNS involvement
that progresses during treatment: 1.8 months. Currently, the most frequently used and important clinical predictive system for patients with
lymphoma is the IPI score, which takes age, Ann Arbor stage, LDH level, performance status, and the number of extranodal disease sites into
account. In addition to her CNS involvement, this patient's IPI score was 4, which indicates poor prognosis. In conclusion, we have
presented a rare, multifocal extranodal DLBCL involvement of 7 anatomical sites. A PET/CT scan can initially find, and greatly characterize
such an uncommon multifocal extranodal DLBCL presentation, and evaluate the extent of disease involvement, and later assess the efficacy of
the treatment. However, biopsy or surgery is the key to the diagnosis of DLBCL. Selection of the optimal treatment regimen is challenging
and warrants further research. Abbreviations: CNS = central nervous system, DLBCL = diffuse large B cell lymphoma, NHL = non-Hodgkin
lymphoma, PET/CT = positron emission tomography/computed tomography. Authorship: CL treated the patient and wrote the paper. LL, PZ, TG, and
YX treated the patient and collected the material. J-SZ performed the IHC stains and the histopathological evaluations. W-CL analyzed the
PET/CT. The authors have no conflicts of interest to disclose.
