Left bronchial isomerism is a rare condition characterized by a bronchial structure on the right side that is a mirror image of the left
side. In this report, we record our experience with a 62‐year‐old female lung cancer patient in whom left bronchial isomerism was discovered
during surgery using a thoracoscope. A right upper pulmonary lobectomy was successfully completed, the key to which was successful
separation of the right upper and middle lobes. As there is a risk of excising the wrong bronchi in such cases, thoracic surgeons need to
identify bronchus variations. The optimal method to do this is to use a bronchoscope and computed tomography images of the bronchial tree
reconstruction prior to surgery. Left bronchial isomerism is a rare anatomic bronchial abnormality, which is defined simply as a condition
in which a person has two bilobed lungs with two long main bronchi.1 Adult patients with this abnormality have rarely been reported.2, 3, 4
Only one case has been reported in the literature in which a bronchus variation was discovered during surgery; however, no photographic
records of this case are available.2 In this report, we describe the details of a patient who was found to have left bronchial isomerism
during lung tumor surgery. In patients with this condition, there is a risk of excising the wrong bronchi by mistake. A 62‐year‐old,
non‐smoking, female patient presented with a solitary pulmonary nodule of the right upper lung, which was discovered by chest computed
tomography (CT). The patient had no history of cough, weight loss, fever, or intercurrent illness. Additionally, no abnormalities were found
during physical and auxiliary examinations. As the lesion was in the periphery of the lung, a bronchoscopic examination was not conducted.
The patient underwent thoracoscopic surgery on 19 June 2014. Initially, a wedge excision of the lesion on the right upper lung was
performed. As intraoperative pathology indicated adenocarcinoma, a right upper pulmonary lobectomy was scheduled. During thoracoscopy, we
found that the patient did not have a horizontal fissure in the right lung, so we elected to conduct a single‐direction operation with a
posterior approach. However, we found no right upper lobe (RUL) bronchus connected to the right main bronchus (RMB) in the rear pulmonary
hilum. After separating the posterior of the oblique fissure, we still found no RUL bronchus located at the posterior of the right pulmonary
artery (RPA; Fig 1a). As the anatomical structure was not clear, we decided firstly to separate the RUL and the middle lobe (ML). This was
accomplished using a surgical stapling device; the stapling lines (SL) can be seen in Figure 1. We then observed that the right lower lobe
bronchus (RLB) and the common right upper and middle lobe bronchi were directly connected to the RMB (Fig 1b,c). In addition, the RPA passed
superiorly to the top of the common bronchi, as is normally the case with the arrangement of left pulmonary hilum structure (Fig 1). After
successfully conducting a single pulmonary lobectomy, we completed lymph node dissection. Intraoperative findings: (a) dorsal view, (b,c)
ventral view. CB, common right upper and middle lobe bronchi; ML, middle lobe; RLB, right lower bronchus; RMB, right main bronchus;
RPA, right pulmonary artery; RUL, right upper lobe; SL, stapling lines. After surgery, we constructed images of the bronchial tree in the
preoperative CT, which revealed that the RUL and ML bronchi had a common stem, and no normal intermediate bronchus was found (Fig 2). This
also confirmed the presence of left bronchial isomerism. No other visceral heterotaxy was found. Computed tomography findings: (a,b)
anterior view, (c) inferior view. Note, we use phrases such as “right up lobe,” “right upper pulmonary,” and “middle lobe” habitually;
however, a middle lobe or a normal right up lobe would not be present once left bronchial isomerism is diagnosed. There are several known
anatomic variations in the tracheobronchial system, including tracheal and accessory cardiac bronchi, diverticula of the trachea, bridging
bronchus, and bronchial isomerism. While sources estimate incidence between 1% and 12%, these variations are a rare clinical entity because
of their asymptomatic nature.5 Left bronchial isomerism is characterized by a bronchial structure on the right side that is a mirror image
of the left side of the body. Until now, there has only been one case reported in the literature that has mentioned this rare variation
being encountered during surgery, and the patient in that case had a right upper and middle lobe bilobectomy because of the location of the
tumor.2 No other documented case has described the surgical experience for this variation. In our case, it was suspected during thoracoscopy
that the RMB was the RUL bronchus, and if the RMB had been cut by mistake, the whole right lung would have to have been removed.
Subsequently, we confirmed that there was no RUL bronchus in the upper side of the right main pulmonary artery, and we recognized the
existence of a bronchus variation. Therefore, the “horizontal fissure” (assuming that it exists) was dealt with first by going through the
tunnel at the base of the “horizontal fissure.” For surgical safety, thoracic surgeons need to identify bronchus variations. The optimal
method is to use a bronchoscope and CT images of the bronchial tree reconstruction prior to surgery. In addition, clues, such as the absence
of an interlobar fissure, malposition of the bronchus, and malposition of the blood vessels, should also receive special attention. When the
anatomical structure of the pulmonary hilum is not clear, interlobar fissures should be dealt with first. No authors report any conflict of
interest. We thank the group members for helpful discussion. This work was supported by grants from the Science and Technology Department of
Zhejiang Province (2013c03044–7, YC), and the Natural Science Foundation of Zhejiang Province (LY13H160016, YC).
