Stiff person syndrome is a highly disabling, progressive autoimmune disorder of the central nervous system characterized by muscle rigidity
and spasms. Stiff person syndrome is rare, but is believed to be under diagnosed with only 14 cases been reported among a 1.7 billion
population in South Asia. We report the first authenticated case from Sri Lanka. A 55-year-old Sri Lankan female presented with difficulty
in walking and recurrent falls due to progressive muscular rigidity in her lower limbs and trunk with superimposed muscle spasms that
occurred in response to unexpected noise, startle or emotional upset. She had anxiety and specific phobias to open spaces, walking unaided
and being among crowds of people. She had insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus and was on thyroxine replacement. On examination, she had
hyperlordosis combined with board-like rigidity of her anterior abdomen and rigidity of her lower limbs bilaterally. Upper limbs were
normal. Magnetic resonance imaging of her neuraxis was normal. Electromyography showed continuous motor unit activity at rest. Glutamic acid
decarboxylase antibodies were detected in her serum at a titre of 15,500 IU/ml (normal <5). She showed a remarkable and sustained
improvement to treatment with intravenous immunoglobulins, immunosuppressive and muscle relaxant medications, regaining independent
ambulation. Diagnosis of stiff person syndrome remains clinical, supported by electromyography and serology for glutamic acid decarboxylase
antibodies, facilitated by a high index of clinical suspicion. An autoimmune basis lends stiff person syndrome amenable to treatment
highlighting the importance of diagnosis. This case adds to map the worldwide distribution of stiff person syndrome. Stiff person syndrome
(SPS), first described by Moersch and Woltman in 1956, is a rare, highly disabling, progressive autoimmune disorder of the central nervous
system (CNS) characterized by muscle rigidity and spasms . Since its original description, several variants of the syndrome including stiff
limb syndrome, jerking SPS, paraneoplastic SPS and progressive encephalomyelitis with rigidity and myoclonus have been described . High
titres of autoantibodies to glutamic acid decarboxylase (GAD), the rate-limiting enzyme in the synthesis of the inhibitory neurotransmitter
gamma-amino butyric acid (GABA), have been reported in approximately 60–80 % of patients with classic SPS . However, SPS remains a clinical
diagnosis facilitated by a high index of suspicion. SPS has an estimated prevalence of 1/million population , but is believed to be
underdiagnosed . Thus far, only 14 cases have been reported from South Asia, which has a collective population of over 1.7 billion. We
report the first authenticated case of classic SPS from Sri Lanka. A 55-year-old Sri Lankan female presented with progressive difficulty in
walking superimposed with muscle spasms since 2002. She had first noted intermittent stiffness in her right lower limb which lasted about
5–10 min at a time but gradually, over months, increased in frequency and duration to be persistent. She then noted the stiffness spreading
to involve her left lower limb making ambulation increasingly difficult. From about 2009, the muscles of her trunk and lower limbs would go
into severe painful spasms in response to unexpected noise, startle or emotional upset. These spasms initially occurred about 1–2/month and
lasted about 30–60 min but over time increased in both frequency and duration. These episodes were associated with drenching sweats and
fear. She has had several falls and injuries due to sudden muscle spasms. She also reported generalised anxiety since the onset of the
illness in 2002 and specific phobias to open spaces, walking unaided and being among a crowd of people. She had felt depressed at times
which she attributed to the disabling nature of the illness which had curtailed her independence. In 2007, she was diagnosed with diabetes
mellitus, which required insulin to achieve normal glycaemic control. In 2014, she was found to be biochemically hypothyroid and commenced
on thyroxine replacement. She has had 3 repeated magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain and spinal cord since 2002, all of which were
reported as normal. After extensive investigation she had been given a presumptive diagnosis of ‘non-compressive myelopathy’ of unknown
aetiology and treated with diazepam and baclofen. However, her condition continued to deteriorate with time. On examination in 2015 she had
hyperlordosis of the lumbar spine (Fig. 1) due to rigid contraction of her thoracolumbar paraspinal muscles associated with stony-hard,
board-like rigidity of her anterior abdominal muscles, markedly increased tone in both lower limbs, and more on the left with the left ankle
being in a plantarflexed posture. Clonus was absent. Muscle power was 5/5 on the right and 4+/5 on the left. Knee jerks were brisk, ankle
jerks were normal and the plantar responses were flexor. The sensory examination was normal. Her distribution of stiffness index was 3/6
(number of stiff areas, range 0–6) and heightened sensitivity index was 7/7 (number of stimuli that induce muscle spasms, range 0–7) while
the modified Rankin score (mRS, range 0–6) was 4. Examination of her upper limbs and cranial nerves were normal. General and other system
examinations were normal. Her blood pressure was 130/80 mmHg.Fig. 1Hyperlordosis of lumbar spine associated with rigid anterior abdominal
wall muscles demonstrated by prominently defined rectus abdominis Hyperlordosis of lumbar spine associated with rigid anterior abdominal
wall muscles demonstrated by prominently defined rectus abdominis Routine haematological and biochemical investigations including blood
counts, inflammatory markers, liver function and renal function tests were normal. Blood glucose was maintained within normal limits with
subcutaneous insulin. Her thyroid stimulating hormone level had been over 100 miU/ml before commencement of thyroxine. Anti-thyroglobulin
antibodies were 102.16 IU/ml (normal 0.00–4.11). Anti-thyroid peroxidase antibodies were 1076 IU/ml (normal 0.5–5.6). Antinuclear antibodies
and rheumatoid factor were normal. Anti-GAD antibodies were 15,500 IU/ml (normal <5). Electromyography (EMG) of abdominal and paraspinal
muscles showed continuous motor unit activity (CMUA) at rest. Nerve conduction studies were normal. She was treated with intravenous
immunoglobulin (IVIg) 0.4 g/kg/d for 5 days and commenced on levetiracetam 250 mg BD later increased to 500 mg BD, mycophenolate mofetil
250 mg BD later increased to 500 mg BD and increasing doses of diazepam, baclofen and tizanidine. Humulin insulin and thyroxine were
titrated to achieve normoglycemia and normal TSH levels. Medical treatment was combined with physiotherapy. Her distribution of stiffness
index reduced to 1/6 after 1 month and the heightened sensitivity index reduced to 1/7 after 3 months while the mRS improved to 3 after
3 months and has remained that at 1 year follow up. Additionally, her susceptibility to excessive startle and anxiety resolved with
treatment, but she continued to have agoraphobia and phobia to open spaces, albeit to a lesser degree. She had a second course of IVIg,
6 months after the initial treatment and has remained clinically stable on immunosuppressive and symptomatic medication. SPS is most common
in the fourth and fifth decades of life affecting more women than men [5, 6]. Our patient fulfilled the clinical criteria of SPS which
includes (1) muscular rigidity in limbs and axial muscles; (2) continuous co-contraction of agonist and antagonist muscles; (3) episodic
spasms precipitated by unexpected noises, tactile stimuli or emotional upset; (4) absence of any other neurological disease that could
explain stiffness and rigidity; and (5) presence of anti-GAD antibodies (GAD-Abs) in serum . She had increased paraspinal muscle tone
causing hyperlordosis, which is a hallmark clinical sign of SPS (Fig. 1). The diagnosis in our patient was clinically supported by the
characteristic, but not unique, EMG finding of CMUA and the detection of serum GAD-Abs in high titre. GAD-Abs are most commonly detected in
type 1 diabetes mellitus (T1DM), which occurs in about 40 % of patients with SPS as seen in our patient, but the titre in T1DM is markedly
lower than that of SPS . Although high titres of GAD-Ab in the range seen in SPS (>1000 IU/ml) have been reported in some cases of
cerebellar ataxia and epilepsy [8, 9], the prevalence of GAD-Abs in those diseases is rare. Other organ specific autoimmune diseases and
autoantibodies, such as the thyroid disease in our patient, are found in around 40 % of patients with SPS . A very typical but poorly
appreciated feature is the marked anxiety, paroxysmal fear, excessive startle and specific phobias such as of open spaces that are
frequently found in these patients. The rate of specific phobia in SPS is at least five times greater than in the general population . These
symptoms coupled with emotionally triggered spasms often contribute to the initial misdiagnosis as neurosis and a delay in the diagnosis of
SPS. There was a delay in diagnosis of 12 years in our patient, possibly due to the slow evolution of the disease coupled with a low index
of suspicion. The average time from symptom onset to diagnosis has been reported to be 6.2 years (range 1–18 years) . SPS remains a clinical
diagnosis supported by typical EMG findings and positive serology for GADAbs. Other causes of rigidity and spasms need exclusion. These
include chronic tetanus, neuromyotonia, dystonia, hyperekplexia with late presentation, spinal multiple sclerosis or paraneoplastic
myelitis, intrinsic spinal cord tumours or syrinx and psychologically determined disorders. Our patient presented with typical features of
SPS supported with EMG features and high-titre GAD-Abs. There was no clinical or neurophysiological evidence of hyperekplexia, dystonia,
myotonia or upper motor neuron syndromes. However, the severe rigidity of her limbs had been misdiagnosed as spasticity even though she had
not had upper motor neuron signs such as extensor plantar responses, clonus or a sensory level, thus contributing to a delay in diagnosis
and appropriate treatment. The clinical severity of SPS can be graded according to the distribution of stiffness index, which records the
number of stiff areas ranging from 0 (none) to 6 and the heightened sensitivity index, which records the number of stimuli that induces
spasms ranging from 0 (none) to 7 . Our patient showed remarkable and sustained improvement of both these indices and mRS few months after
initiating immunomodulatory and immunosuppressive therapies. IVIg is the only immunomodulatory treatment that has been shown to confer
significant improvement in a randomised, double-blinded, placebo-controlled crossover trial . It has been suggested that GAD-Abs are
pathogenic and cause loss of GABAergic inhibition in the CNS that is responsible for the muscle spasms and rigidity. However, given that GAD
is an intracellular protein that is not thought to be accessible to circulating antibodies, it may be that GAD-Abs are part of a wider
autoimmune process rather than the specific cause of the disease [13, 14]. Our case report highlights the need for a high index of clinical
suspicion in order to diagnose a rare, but progressively disabling autoimmune central nervous system disorder for which effective treatment
is available. It further adds to map the worldwide distribution of SPS in different populations. antibodies continuous motor unit activity
central nervous system electromyogram gamma-amino butyric acid glutamic acid decarboxylase intravenous immunoglobulin magnetic resonance
imaging modified Rankin scale stiff person syndrome thyroid stimulating hormone TC was the primary physician caring for the patient. BL
titrated the serum GAD-Abs. TC wrote the manuscript; BL and AV critically appraised and revised it. All authors read and approved the final
manuscript. Mr. Sarath of the Audio-visual Unit of the Faculty of Medicine-University of Colombo for the digital photography. The authors
declare that they have no competing interests. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this case report
and accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. Not applicable to
case reports. There are no images that allows patient identification.
