Fast-growing congenital hepatic cysts with intracystic hemorrhage are rare in clinical practice. Additionally, the clinical manifestations
of and laboratory and imaging findings for this condition are often nonspecific and are particularly difficult to differentiate from those
of hepatobiliary cystadenoma and cystadenocarcinoma, thus posing great challenges for diagnosis and treatment. The 2 case reports presented
here aim to analyze the diagnosis and treatment of 2 rare cases of congenital hepatic cysts with intracystic hemorrhage in the Chinese Han
population to provide an important reference for the clinical diagnosis and treatment of this condition. These 2 case reports present 2 rare
cases of congenital hepatic cysts with intracystic hemorrhage. Case 1 involved a 31-year-old patient with a very large, fast-growing hepatic
cyst with intracystic hemorrhage and elevated carbohydrate antigen 199. Case 2 involved a patient with intense, paroxysmal right upper
abdominal pain; computed tomography suggested a hepatic cyst with intracystic hemorrhage and possibly hepatobiliary cystadenoma. Both
patients underwent liver resection. Postoperative follow-up showed that for both patients, the symptoms improved, the laboratory findings
returned to normal levels, and the surgical outcomes were satisfactory. Liver resection is an ideal treatment for patients with congenital
hepatic cysts with intracystic hemorrhage, and especially those with fast-growing, symptomatic hepatic cysts or hepatic cysts that are
difficult to differentiate from hepatobiliary cystadenoma and cystadenocarcinoma. Generally speaking, “hepatic cyst” refers to various
hepatic cystic diseases, which may be parasitic or nonparasitic, depending on the cause. Parasitic hepatic cysts are mainly observed in
hydatid liver disease, whereas nonparasitic hepatic cysts may be congenital, inflammatory, traumatic, or neoplastic. Congenital hepatic
cysts are the most common, so the term “hepatic cyst” usually refers to these cysts, also known as simple hepatic cysts, which is a
condition that may be related to congenital biliary developmental aberrations. Congenital hepatic cysts may or may not be solitary. Hepatic
cysts usually have a single compartment with a thin wall and clear intracystic fluid and without local thickening, nodules, or septa. The
incidence of congenital hepatic cysts is approximately 2.5%, and these are more common in women and tend to occur in the right lobe.
Congenital hepatic cysts grow slowly, and most such cysts are asymptomatic and are detected during routine physical check-up. Congenital
hepatic cysts are easy to diagnose and usually require no specific treatment except in cases of complications, such as intracystic
hemorrhage, infection, cyst rupture, jaundice, or portal hypertension. Cases of fast-growing congenital hepatic cysts with intracystic
hemorrhage are rare in clinical practice, accounting for approximately 10% of all cases of congenital hepatic cysts. The clinical
manifestations and laboratory and imaging findings are often nonspecific and are particularly difficult to differentiate from those of
hepatobiliary cystadenoma and cystadenocarcinoma, posing great challenges for diagnosis and treatment. Recently, our center admitted 2
Chinese Han patients with rare cases of congenital hepatic cysts with intracystic hemorrhage and successfully performed liver resection in
these patients. The 2 case reports below aim to provide an important reference for the clinical diagnosis and treatment of hepatic cysts
with intracystic hemorrhage. A 31-year-old female Chinese Han patient was admitted to the hospital “6 years after surgery for hepatic cyst
rupture, showing abdominal distension with yellowing of the skin and sclera for 1 month.” Six years earlier, the patient had sought medical
attention for “abdominal pain after abdominal impact.” Examination suggested “liver rupture, ascites,” and laparotomy showed “hepatic cyst
rupture”; hence, the patient underwent “hepatic cyst resection,” and postoperative pathology suggested a “hepatic cyst.” During the
operation, the surgeon found 2 additional “hepatic cysts” of approximately 2 to 3 cm in size but decided to leave them untouched. One month
before presentation, the patient had developed abdominal distension with yellowing of the skin and sclera. Computed tomography (CT)
performed at a local hospital suggested an extremely large hepatic cyst, and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) suggested possibly cancerous
hepatic cystadenoma. The patient visited our hospital for further examination. Liver function tests showed total bilirubin 30.2 μmol/L,
direct bilirubin 22.4 μmol/L, total bile acid 43.5 μmol/L, albumin 37 g/L, prealbumin 92 mg/L, and alanine aminotransferase 83 U/L.
Hepatitis B surface antigen and antihepatitis C antibodies were negative. Tests for tumor markers showed that alpha-fetoprotein and
carcinoembryonic antigen were negative. The carbohydrate antigen 199 (CA19-9) level was 298 U/mL. CT showed 2 masses (approximately
13.2 × 19.9 cm and 8.3 × 10.4 cm in size) of slightly low density. Septa were visible in the larger cyst, with enhancement of the cystic
wall and septa and no significant enhancement inside the cyst (Fig. 1A and B). CT indicated multiple hepatic cystic lesions, which were
possibly cystadenoma. Magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography (MRCP) showed dilation of the left intrahepatic bile ducts (possibly
related to compression of the hilar bile ducts) and unclear extrahepatic bile ducts (Fig. 1C and D), indicating multiple hepatic cystic
lesions, which were possibly cystadenoma. Liver magnetic resonance angiography showed compression and displacement of the hilar vessels,
clear images of the trunk and branches of the portal vein, and compression and displacement of the hepatic veins (Fig. 1E), indicating a
huge hepatic cystic lesion. Liver computed tomographic arteriography showed compression and displacement of the hilar vessels, clear images
of the trunk and branches of the portal vein, a clear right hepatic vein (compressed and displaced), and an unclear left hepatic vein (Fig.
1F). CT measurement showed that the overall liver volume was 4590 mL, the functional liver volume (FLV) was 1030 mL, the FLV of the right
liver was 455 mL, and the FLV of the left liver was 575 mL (Fig. 1G–J). As the calculated standard liver volume (SLV) was 1231 mL and the
FLV of the right liver was 455 mL, the SLV-to-FLV ratio (SFLVR; FLV/SLV%) for the right liver was 37.0%, and given that the FLV of the left
liver was 575 mL, the SFLVR for the right liver was 46.7%. Imaging examination. (A, B) CT showed 2 masses (approximately 13.2 × 19.9 cm and
8.3 × 10.4 cm in size) of slightly low density. Septa were visible in the larger cyst, with enhancement of the cystic wall and septa and no
significant enhancement inside the cyst. (C, D) MRCP showed dilation of the left intrahepatic bile ducts (possibly related to compression of
the hilar bile ducts) and unclear extrahepatic bile ducts. (E) MRA showed compression and displacement of the hilar vessels, clear images of
the trunk and branches of the portal vein, and compression and displacement of the hepatic veins. (F) CTA showed compression and
displacement of the hilar vessels, clear images of the trunk and branches of the portal vein, a clear right hepatic vein (compressed and
displaced), and an unclear left hepatic vein. (G, H, I, J) CT measurement showed that the overall liver volume was 4590 mL, and the FLV was
1030 mL: the FLV of the right liver was 455 mL, and the FLV of the left liver was 575 mL. CT = computed tomography, CTA = computed
tomographic arteriography, FLV = future liver volume, MRA = magnetic resonance angiography. The patient had no history of exposure to
pastoral areas and no family history of cancer or genetic diseases. The patient was scheduled for resection of the 3 right lobes and the
gallbladder. Intraoperative exploration showed a huge cystic mass of approximately 25 × 20 cm in size in the middle lobe, extending down to
the pelvis and adhering to the gallbladder and the first porta hepatis. Moreover, another cystic mass, which was approximately 10 × 10 cm in
size, was present in the lower right lobe, immediately adjacent to the huge cystic mass (Fig. 2A and B). Due to its size, the huge cystic
mass in the middle lobe affected the operation; thus, the mass was punctured, and approximately 3400 mL of brown turbid liquid with a foul
smell was withdrawn. Both the lateral left lobe and the posterior right upper lobe were enlarged, with a palpable right hepatic vein and an
impalpable left hepatic vein. Resection of the 3 right lobes was planned. During the operation, the right hilum was blocked for 16 minutes,
the first porta hepatis was blocked for 3 minutes, and the inferior vena cava was blocked for 29 minutes. Blood loss was approximately
2000 mL, and intraoperative transfusion included 1600 mL of red blood cells and 800 mL of plasma. According to the postoperative pathology
report, gross examination of the surgical specimen showed that the specimen was 22.3 × 16 × 8.4 cm in size; the cystic cavity was 20 × 11 cm
in size (as observed based on the specimen surface and sections); the cavity was filled with brown turbid liquid; the interior cystic wall
was rough and 0.2 to 0.7 cm thick, with a small amount of bleeding in part of the wall; and no apparent cirrhosis was observed in the
remaining liver tissue (Fig. 2C–E). Microscopic examination showed that the cystic wall was covered with a single layer of squamous
epithelial cells, with hyperplasia of the fibrous tissue (especially elastic fibers) beneath the epithelial cells, infiltration of a small
number of inflammatory cells (Fig. 3A and B). Pathological examination indicated liver cysts. After the operation, the patient recovered
well, and cystic fluid culture showed no bacterial growth. CA19-9 returned to normal at 1 month after the operation, and the bile leakage
that occurred after the operation self-resolved in 3 weeks. Intraoperative exploration and gross examination of the surgical specimen. (A,
B) Intraoperative exploration showed a huge cystic mass of approximately 25 × 20 cm in size in the middle lobe, extending down to the pelvis
and adhering to the gallbladder and the first porta hepatis. Moreover, another cystic mass, approximately 10 × 10 cm in size, was present in
the lower right lobe immediately adjacent to the huge cystic mass. (C, D, E) Gross examination of the surgical specimen showed that the
specimen was 22.3 × 16 × 8.4 cm in size; the cystic cavity was 20 × 11 cm in size (as observed based on the specimen surface and sections);
the cavity was filled with brown turbid liquid; the interior cystic wall was rough and 0.2 to 0.7 cm thick, with a small amount of bleeding
in part of the wall; and no apparent cirrhosis was observed in the remaining liver tissue. Histopathological examination. (A, B) Microscopic
examination showed that the cystic wall was covered with a single layer of squamous epithelial cells, with hyperplasia of the fibrous tissue
(especially elastic fibers) beneath the epithelial cells, infiltration of a small number of inflammatory cells (hematoxylin and eosin stain:
A, magnification × 100; B, magnification × 40). (C, D) Microscopic examination showed that the cystic wall was covered with a single layer
of squamous epithelial cells, with hyperplasia of the fibrous tissue underneath the epithelial cells, infiltration of inflammatory cells.
(Hematoxylin and eosin stain: C, magnification × 100; D, magnification × 40). Two months before presentation, a 45-year-old female Chinese
Han patient had experienced right upper abdominal distension and intense pain of unknown origin; the symptoms lasted several minutes and
then resolved without treatment. An ultrasound B-mode scan showed a cystic mass in the right lobe of approximately 11.5 × 8.6 cm in size,
which was possibly a hepatic cyst. Liver CT suggested a right-lobe mass of approximately 11 × 8 cm in size. Enhanced CT showed a cystic mass
at the edge of the liver parenchyma, with uneven enhancement during the arterial phase; the density of the lesion was lower than that of the
surrounding normal liver parenchyma during the portal and delayed phases, indicating possible hepatic cystadenoma (Fig. 4A and B). MRCP
showed a mass of approximately 10 × 13 cm in size with high T1 and T2 signals and with multiple nodules on the wall of the right anterior
lobe (Fig. 4C and D). Laboratory tests were largely normal, and liver function was rated Child grade A; thus, the lesion was operable.
During the operation, a cystic lesion of approximately 12 × 12 cm in size was observed in liver segments 5 and 8, directly adjacent to the
gallbladder. Thus, resection of liver segments 5 and 8 and the gallbladder was planned. During the operation, the hilum was blocked for 25
minutes. Blood loss was approximately 500 mL, 1500 mL of fluid was infused, and no blood transfusion was given. The cystic fluid was brown
and turbid. According to the postoperative pathology report, gross examination showed that the cystic wall-like tissue was 13.2 × 7 cm in
size and that the interior cystic wall (0.1- to 0.4-cm thick) was smooth. Additionally, the gallbladder was 8.1 × 4.2 cm in size, the
gallbladder wall was 0.1 to 0.2 cm in thickness, and the mucosa was rough. Microscopic examination showed that the cystic wall was covered
with a single layer of squamous epithelial cells, with hyperplasia of the fibrous tissue underneath the epithelial cells, infiltration of
inflammatory cells (Fig. 3C and D). Pathological examination suggested a hepatic cyst and chronic cholecystitis. The patient recovered well
after the operation. Imaging examination and postoperative specimen. (A, B) CT showed a right-lobe mass of approximately 11 × 8 cm in size.
Enhanced CT showed a cystic mass at the edge of the liver parenchyma, with uneven enhancement during the arterial phase. The density of the
lesion was lower than that of the surrounding normal liver parenchyma during the portal and delayed phases. (C, D) MRCP showed a mass with
high T1 and T2 signals, approximately 10 × 13 cm in size, with multiple nodules on the wall in the right anterior lobe. CT = computed
tomography, MRCP = magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography. In hepatic cysts, intracystic hemorrhage may be caused by excessive
intracystic pressure and the ensuing necrosis of vascular epithelial tissue of the cystic wall. The cystic fluid is mahogany colored or
bloody. For the 2 patients described here, the cystic fluid was brown and turbid; thus, the properties of the cystic fluid did not support
intracystic hemorrhage. However, the patients had no fever, and cystic fluid culture showed no bacterial growth; thus, cystic infection was
excluded. If communicated to the bile duct, cystic fluid should be light yellow, and thus, this possibility was also excluded. Based on
imaging findings (see below) and the pathological process of hemoglobin destruction or absorption after intracystic hemorrhage, we made a
diagnosis of a hepatic cyst with intracystic hemorrhage. We invite discussion of other reasonable diagnostic hypotheses that might explain
the pathological changes observed in these 2 cases. The clinical manifestations of hepatic cysts with intracystic hemorrhage are
nonspecific, and patients with this condition may seek medical attention for a series of clinical manifestations and complications related
to the size of the cyst, such as acute or chronic abdominal pain, a fast-growing mass during a regular check-up, and jaundice. The patient
in Case 1 visited the hospital due to abdominal distension, mass, and yellowing of the skin and sclera. Fast-growing cysts must be
differentiated from hepatobiliary cystadenoma and cystadenocarcinoma. The patient in Case 2 visited the hospital due to intense paroxysmal
right upper abdominal pain, which should be differentiated from acute cholecystitis. In addition, a congenital hepatic cyst with intracystic
hemorrhage should be differentiated from hydatid liver disease and liver abscess. The imaging and laboratory findings for a hepatic cyst
with intracystic hemorrhage are nonspecific. T1-weighted MRI images may show high signals for hemorrhagic cysts and low signals for
nonhemorrhagic cysts, and T2-weighted images may show high signals for both hemorrhagic cysts and nonhemorrhagic cysts. CT usually shows low
density for nonhemorrhagic cysts and may show high density for hemorrhagic cysts in the acute stage and low density or mixed density after
the acute stage. Vilgrain et al reported clinical data for 4 patients with congenital hepatic cysts with intracystic hemorrhage, for whom
MRI showed high signals on both T1 and T2 images, similar to what was observed in Case 2. Hagiwara et al reported 1 case of a cystic lesion,
8 cm in size, that was detected by an ultrasound B-mode scan. The cystic wall was thin and smooth, with scattered calcifications and small
nodules. Enhanced CT and MRI showed mild enhancement, and MRI showed high T1 and T2 signals in the cystic fluid. The patient was considered
to have a malignant tumor and underwent liver resection. During the operation, the cystic fluid was bloody, and postoperative pathological
examination confirmed that the nodules were organized hematomas. Serum and cystic fluid CA19-9 levels may not contribute to distinguishing
between congenital hepatic cysts with intracystic hemorrhage and cystadenoma or cystadenocarcinoma. In Case 1 in the present study, serum
CA19-9 was significantly elevated (CA19-9 in the cystic fluid: NA), and in Case 2, serum CA19-9 was not high (CA19-9 in the cystic fluid:
NA). Dinc et al reported 1 case of a huge hepatic cyst with elevated serum CA19-9; the authors believed that the elevated CA19-9 may have
been related to compression of the surrounding organs by the huge hepatic cyst and excessive secretion by the epithelial tissue in the
thickened cystic wall. Horsmans determined CA19-9 levels in the serum and the cystic fluid in 1 case of cystadenoma and 1 case of
cystadenocarcinoma and found that both serum CA19-9 and CA19-9 in the cystic fluid were elevated in cystadenoma and cystadenocarcinoma,
whereas only CA19-9 in the cystic fluid was elevated in a congenital hepatic cyst. CA19-9 may not contribute to the differential diagnosis
of congenital hepatic cysts with intracystic hemorrhage. Choi et al showed that CA19-9 and carcinoembryonic antigen levels in the cystic
fluid were of little significance for differentiating between biliary cystadenoma and a simple hepatic cyst. Bertino et al showed that serum
CA19-9 levels were frequently elevated in chronic viral hepatitis and hepatic cirrhosis. Serum CA19-9 levels may be elevated due to
compression of the surrounding organs by the huge hepatic cyst and the excessive secretion by epithelial tissue in the thickened cystic
wall. Elevated cystic fluid CA19-9 levels may be detected in patients with elevated serum CA19-9 levels and intracystic hemorrhage, which
may be caused by excessive intracystic pressure and ensuing necrosis of vascular epithelial tissue of the cystic wall. Thus, in Case 1,
CA19-9 in the cystic fluid may be significantly elevated, and in Case 2, CA19-9 in the cystic fluid may be not high. A congenital hepatic
cyst with intracystic hemorrhage may be treated with a nonsurgical or surgical approach. Nonsurgical approaches mainly include percutaneous
drainage, which is primarily used in confirmed cases in the elderly and in patients with a poor general condition. The relapse rate for
nonsurgical approaches is relatively high; studies have reported that the relapse rate for percutaneous drainage is up to 100%. Surgical
approaches include laparoscopy and open cyst fenestration, liver resection, and liver transplantation. Hotta et al and Poggi et al each
reported 1 case of spontaneous rupture of a huge hepatic cyst. In the present study, the 2 patients had obvious symptoms and were at risk of
cyst rupture. The cysts could have been hepatobiliary cystadenoma or a malignancy such as cystadenocarcinoma, and the cysts were large.
Thus, the patients underwent open resection. After the operations, the patients recovered well, with satisfactory outcomes. Martin et al
showed that no patient requires a second surgery after liver resection of a symptomatic hepatic cyst. We believe that liver resection should
be considered if cystadenoma or cystadenocarcinoma cannot be ruled out and in cases with turbid cystic fluid if it is not clear whether the
cyst communicates with the bile duct or whether intracystic hemorrhage or infection is present. Liver transplantation is indicated in
patients with poor liver function who cannot tolerate surgery and in patients whose FLV is too small. In Case 1, both cysts were large and
located in the middle lobe, posing great challenges for liver resection. In addition, the patient had a history of surgery; before the
operation, she had experienced liver damage (high total bilirubin and low prealbumin [possibly related to wasting and loss of appetite]),
and her left hepatic vein was unclear on radiographic images. Due to these unfavorable surgical factors, it was extremely difficult to
preserve her left hepatic lobe. In terms of preserving the FLV, cystectomy retained the maximum amount of liver tissue, which ensured
postoperative recovery. However, the operation was associated with a long operation time, a large liver wound, and high blood loss, all of
which increase surgical risk. In contrast, resection of 3 lobes simplified the operation. Thus, before the operation, an accurate assessment
was performed, and the FLV was calculated to determine the surgical approach. According to Urata's method, the patient's body surface area
(body weight 0.425 × height 0.725 × 0.007184 m2) was first calculated, after which the SLV was calculated (formula: [706.2 × body surface
area (m2) + 2.4] mL) and the SFLVR was calculated. In Asian populations, the safety threshold for donors for live liver transplantation is
30% of the SLV. For Case 1, the FLV of the right liver was 455 mL, and the SFLVR was 37.0%, whereas the FLV of the left liver was 575 mL,
and the SFLVR was 46.7%. Thus, either the left or the right liver could have been preserved, but it was obviously safer to preserve the left
liver. During the operation, the 3 right lobes were resected while effectively preserving the FLV. The patient recovered well after the
operation. For congenital hepatic cysts with intracystic hemorrhage, in patients with a poor general condition and elderly patients with a
confirmed preoperative diagnosis, nonsurgical approaches can be used. In addition, for fast-growing, symptomatic, and huge hepatic cysts as
well as cysts that are difficult to differentiate from hepatobiliary cystadenoma and cystadenocarcinoma, liver resection may be an ideal
treatment if the benefits and risks are thoroughly evaluated before the operation. Abbreviations: CA199 = carbohydrate antigen 199, CEA =
carcinoembryonic antigen, CT = computed tomography, FLV = future liver volume, MRCP = magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography, MRI =
magnetic resonance imaging, NA = not available, SFLVR = standardized future liver volume ratio, SLV = standardized liver volume. QN wrote
the manuscript. MZ, CY, WS and JY performed the surgeries. QN and WC assisted in the management of patients. QZ revised the figures. WS and
JY supervised the writing of the manuscript and are the corresponding authors of the article. JY is the head of the Special Treatment and
Liver Transplantation Department. All the authors have read and approved the final manuscript. No benefits in any form have been received or
will be received from a commercial party related directly or indirectly to the subject of this article. Because this article does not refer
to the patients’ privacy, ethical approval is not necessary. Informed consents were obtained from the patients. The authors have no
conflicts of interest to declare.
