Carina resection and reconstruction is a challenging procedure for thoracic surgeons. We describe a novel technique of thoracoscopic carina
reconstruction using the natural bifurcation, following pulmonary resection of the lung neoplasm. To our knowledge, it is the first report
of this kind. A 71-year-old male diagnosed of squamous cell lung cancer received two-port approached video-assisted thoracoscopic right
bilobectomy with carina resection after 2 cycles of neoadjuvant therapy. After the removal of right lower lobe and middle lobe, the 7
station lymph nodes were resected with the invaded carina and bronchial walls in an en-bloc fashion. The neocarina was reconstructed by the
natural bifurcation between the right upper bronchus and the bronchus intermedius. Intraoperative blood loss was about 220 mL, and operative
time was about 225 min. The postoperative course was uneventful. The pathological TNM stage was pT3N2M0, IIIA. Adjuvant chemotherapy using
gemcitabine and cisplatin was administered for 4 cycles. Follow-up 6 months after surgery confirmed no stenosis and no signs of local
recurrence by bronchoscopy and CT scan. We consider that the surgical procedure described here is a new alternative strategy for carina
resection and reconstruction in the similar situation. The minimally invasive method is safe and effective for this challenging operation.
The online version of this article (doi:10.1186/s13019-016-0541-9) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.
Carina resection and reconstruction is a challenging procedure for thoracic surgeons. The surgical method is widely dependent on the
location and extent of the invasion. Here we present a minimally invasive surgical technique to perform this procedure by using the natural
bronchial bifurcation for the neocarina. To our knowledge, it is the first report of this kind. A 71-year-old male presented with 2 months
of cough and dyspnea. He had a 50-year smoking history and 1 month of smoking cessation. Physical examination was unremarkable. The position
emission tomography and CT scan revealed two pieces of connected neoplasm located in the right lower lobe, and local lymph nodes metastases
in the 7, 10R and 11R stations (Fig. 1). No distant metastasis was detected. The CT-guided percutaneous lung biopsy suggested poorly
differentiated squamous cell carcinoma in primary. Bronchoscopy demonstrated no abnormality. On admission, routine laboratory studies
including arterial blood gas analysis were normal. The pulmonary function test was normal. The patient received 2 cycles of neoadjuvant
therapy with gemcitabine and cisplatin. The preoperative diagnosis was primary lung cancer, cT3N2M0, resectable IIIA stage.Fig. 1 a Series
of CT images showed two lesions in right lower lobe with enlarged subcarinal, right hilar and interlobar lymph nodes. b Coronal CT image
showed the relationship between the subcarinal lymph nodes and the airways a Series of CT images showed two lesions in right lower lobe with
enlarged subcarinal, right hilar and interlobar lymph nodes. b Coronal CT image showed the relationship between the subcarinal lymph nodes
and the airways The patient was placed in a left lateral decubitus position. The double-lumen intubation was performed. The main incision
was about 4 cm that located at the fourth intercostal space of the anterior axillary line. The assisted spot was located at the seventh
intercostal space of the midaxillary line, and was used for introducing a 10 mm 30° thoracoscope. We completed the whole operation without
visual access through the incision and without rib spreading (Additional file 1: Figure S1). We used electronic hook, curved suction
apparatus, and other thoracoscopic instruments and equipment. Before surgery, radiology based rapid prototyping showed that the enlarged and
fused subcarinal lymph nodes were close to the carina and the inner wall of bronchus (Fig. 2).Fig. 2 a The rapid prototyping image showed
the relationship between the subcarinal lymph nodes and the airways (the green area showed the draft of resection part of the airways,
including left main bronchus, carina, right main bronchus, and the bronchus intermedius). b The stimulated image of airways after resection.
c The stimulated image of airways after carina reconstruction (the green line showed the expected suture line) a The rapid prototyping image
showed the relationship between the subcarinal lymph nodes and the airways (the green area showed the draft of resection part of the
airways, including left main bronchus, carina, right main bronchus, and the bronchus intermedius). b The stimulated image of airways after
resection. c The stimulated image of airways after carina reconstruction (the green line showed the expected suture line) During the
operation, the lung was first retracted anteriorly to mobilize the posterior hilum. Through detection, the subcarinal, the right posterior
hilar and interlobar lymph nodes were found enlarged and fused together, highly attaching to the inner wall of left main bronchus, the
carina, the inner wall of right main bronchus and the bronchus intermedius, which matched the preoperative evaluation. To achieve R0
resection, we decided to perform bilobectomy of right lower lobe and right middle lobe with carina resection and reconstruction. After
dividing the pulmonary ligament, the inferior pulmonary vein and the middle lobe vein were excised. The pulmonary arteries were excised in
regular way through fissure. All the pulmonary vessels and fissure were manipulated by the mechanical staple. The specimen was removed after
cutting off the distal bronchus intermedius by scissors. The carina, the inner walls of both left and right main bronchus were excised with
the massive lymph nodes in an en-bloc fashion (Fig. 3a).Fig. 3 a The defect after the en-bloc resection of carina (the endotracheal tube was
inserted into the left main bronchus). b The anastomosis between the left main bronchial semicircular defect and the semicircular wall of
the right bronchus. c The closure of the carina. d The neocarina after reconstruction. LMB: left main bronchus; RMB: right main bronchus;
RBI: right bronchus intemedius; RUB: right upper bronchus a The defect after the en-bloc resection of carina (the endotracheal tube was
inserted into the left main bronchus). b The anastomosis between the left main bronchial semicircular defect and the semicircular wall of
the right bronchus. c The closure of the carina. d The neocarina after reconstruction. LMB: left main bronchus; RMB: right main bronchus;
RBI: right bronchus intemedius; RUB: right upper bronchus The reconstruction was made by 3–0 polene with running sutures. To decrease the
tension, each one of the stitches was sutured for only 1 to 2 cm long. The closure of the cartilage portion was performed firstly. Then the
left main bronchial semicircular defect was patched, using the residual semicircular wall of the right bronchus (Fig. 3b). The membranous
portion was sutured at last. To avoid the airways instability, the spare cartilage tissue of the right bronchus was constrictively sutured
onto the membranous portion of neocarina, and served as osseous support (Fig. 3c). The bifurcation between the right upper bronchus and the
bronchus intermedius was used as the neocarina (Fig. 3d). During the reconstruction, when the operator was resecting and suturing the
bronchus or the carina, the anesthetist loosened the tube balloon and retracted the endotracheal tube above the carina, which spared the
space for surgical manipulation. A little airway leakage in seconds was allowed and the patient would tolerate it well. Before the operator
was knotting, the anesthetist inserted the tube back to its original position with the help of operator’s guide. During the reconstruction,
no apnoea was used. After reconstruction, no air leakage was noted with a sustained airway pressure of 25 cmH2O. Coverage of anastomosis was
made by the pericardium fat. Frozen sections of resection margins were negative. Intraoperative blood loss was about 220 mL, and operative
time was about 225 min. The postoperative course was uneventful. The chest tube was removed on postoperative day 4. The patient was
discharged on postoperative day 7. The final pathologic examination confirmed the tumor invasion of the carina, and revealed metastases in
the 4R, 7, 10R, 11R stations. Adjuvant chemotherapy using gemcitabine and cisplatin was administered for 4 cycles. Follow-up 6 months after
surgery confirmed no stenosis and no signs of local recurrence by bronchoscopy and CT scan (Additional file 1: Figure S2). The carina
resection and reconstruction is indicated to the invasion of lower trachea or carina by malignance . For non-small cell lung cancer, the
overall survival of 5 years for carina resection ranges from 28.5 to 66.3 % . The technique is various according to extent of invasion. In
this case, the invasion is induced by the metastasized lymph nodes, which is a less common situation. During the operation, the invaded
carina was resected and reconstructed by the natural bifurcation. This novel technique help the neocarina avoid neither a redundant suture
nor an artificial reconstruction. Meanwhile, it reserves a functional carina and the stability of airways. Before surgery, we used computed
rapid prototyping to evaluate the invasion of the carina and the bronchus. The result showed the invaded wall was less than 50 % of airway
circumference, which technically supported the performance of the reconstruction plan . The rapid prototyping technique has just been used
in thoracic surgery recently. Several researches report its advantage in pulmonary segmentectomy [7, 8]. In this case, the result of rapid
prototyping was conformed to the intraoperative detection, which indicates the probability to use this technique in the surgery of central
lung neoplasm. We consider that the surgical procedure described here is a new alternative strategy for carina resection and reconstruction
in the similar situation. The minimally invasive method combined with rapid prototyping is safe and effective for this challenging
operation. Additional file 1: Figure S1. The surgical incisions. Figure S2. (A) Follow-up CT scan 6 months after surgery showed clear
airways without recurrence. (B) Follow-up bronchoscopy 1 months after surgery showed the neocarina (the white arrow indicated the
granulomatous hyperplasia). (C) The same bronchoscopy showed the normal distal right upper bronchus. (DOCX 1549 kb) The surgical incisions.
Figure S2. (A) Follow-up CT scan 6 months after surgery showed clear airways without recurrence. (B) Follow-up bronchoscopy 1 months after
surgery showed the neocarina (the white arrow indicated the granulomatous hyperplasia). (C) The same bronchoscopy showed the normal distal
right upper bronchus. (DOCX 1549 kb) Not applicable. All the authors state that there is no grant, funding, financial support or technical
or other assistance in this article. Not applicable. WJ performed the operation; YZ, TQ, and BF were the surgery assistants; JS performed
the anesthesia; TQ drafted the manuscript. YX helped to draft the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. All the
authors state that there is no conflict and/or competing interest. There is no any prior or related publications, and prior abstract/poster
presentation. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this report and any accompanying images. A copy of
the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. The ethics committee of Qingdao University has consented
the ethics approval and the participation for this case report. All authors consent to publish this manuscript.
