Present address: Department of Clinical Laboratory, Japan Community Healthcare Organization Kanazawa Hospital/Division of Health Sciences,
Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Kanazawa University, Ishikawa, Japan Primary pulmonary neoplasms of the Ewing family of tumors (EFT)
are extremely rare and usually occur in adolescents or young adults. Only about 40 cases of pulmonary EFT have been reported in English
literature, and no cytological studies have been documented. In this report, we describe the cytopathological findings of a primary
pulmonary EFT in an elderly patient. A 70‐year‐old man sought care because of a progressing cough and dyspnea. Chest computed tomography
revealed a circumscribed mass of 6 cm in the left upper lobe. Fine needle aspiration cytology and core needle biopsy revealed uniform round
cell proliferation. The predominant population consisted of cells with thickened nuclear membranes, finely dispersed chromatin, single
distinct nucleoli, and indistinct cytoplasm. The other population consisted of smaller cells with darker chromatin. The cytoplasm stained
positive for periodic acid–Schiff stain and was digested by diastase. Immunohistochemistry showed positivity for MIC2 (CD99), and focal
positivity for neuron specific enolase, synaptophysin, and chromogranin A. Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) revealed EWSR1
translocation. Although rare, pulmonary EFT cannot be disregarded, regardless of age. When two populations of uniform, round cells are
observed, immunohistochemistry with MIC2 (CD99) and cytogenetic analysis by reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction or FISH should
be considered. Cytological diagnosis may play an important role in the early diagnosis and treatment of pulmonary EFT. The Ewing family of
tumors (EFT) is a group of undifferentiated round cell sarcomas, including Ewing sarcoma (ES) of the bone, Askin's tumor of the chest wall,
extraskeletal Ewing sarcoma (EES), and primitive neuroectodermal tumor (PNET). The tumors are characterized by chromosomal translocation
involving the EWSR1 gene.1 It generally develops at a young age and has an aggressive course.2 Primary pulmonary EFT is extremely rare, with
only 40 cases reported in English literature. None of these reports has focused on cytopathological findings. Here, we describe the
cytopathological findings of a primary pulmonary EFT in a 70‐year‐old man. A 70‐year‐old man sought care because of a progressing cough and
dyspnea. Chest radiograph revealed a mass in the left lung (Fig 1a). Computed tomography revealed a circumscribed 6 cm tumor in the left
upper lung (Fig 1b). The tumor did not appear to invade the thoracic wall. Systemic magnetic resonance imaging and bone scintigraphy were
negative for other lesions. Laboratory tests showed anemia (hemoglobin, 11.0 g/dL), a slight increase of squamous cell carcinoma antigen
(3.8 ng/mL; reference range < 1.5 ng/mL), neuron specific enolase (NSE; 19.1 ng/mL; reference range < 16.3 ng/mL), and pulmonary
surfactant‐associated protein D (234 ng/mL; reference range < 110 ng/mL). The patient underwent percutaneous fine needle aspiration cytology
(FNAC) and core needle biopsy of the tumor, and a diagnosis of EFT was established by pathological examination. After the diagnosis, he was
treated with chemotherapy, but died four months after the diagnosis. (a) Chest radiograph showed a large mass in the left upper lung; (b)
chest computed tomography revealed a circumscribed 6 cm tumor in the left upper lobe. The Papanicolaou‐stained FNAC specimen showed a
uniform population of small round cells (Fig 2a,b). The cells predominantly exhibited thickened nuclear membranes with finely dispersed
chromatin and single nucleoli. The cytoplasms were indistinct. Smaller and more hyperchromatic cells that apparently referred to so‐called
dark cells were mixed.3 Rosette formation was not observed. Malignant small round cell sarcoma was suspected by cytology, but a definitive
diagnosis was not made. (a) Aspiration cytology of the tumor showed a uniform small round cell population (Papanicolaou, × 200). (b) Tumor
cells were discohesive and exhibited thickened nuclear membranes with finely dispersed chromatin and single distinct nucleoli. The cytoplasm
was scanty or indistinct. Smaller cells with darker chromatin (arrows) were mixed (Papanicolaou, × 400). (c) Histology of the core needle
biopsy showed trabecular, cord‐like, or singular proliferation in a myxofibrous stroma (hematoxylin & eosin stain, × 200). (d) Tumor focally
showed a solid proliferation. Tumor cells consisted of a monotonous population of small round cells with scant cytoplasm (H&E stain, × 400).
Histology of the needle biopsy specimen showed solid, trabecular, cord‐like, or singular proliferation of discohesive small round cells in a
myxofibrous stroma (Fig 2c,d). Mitotic figures were rare. No necrosis was present. The cytoplasm stained positive for periodic acid–Schiff
stain and was digested by diastase (Fig 3a). (a) Periodic acid–Schiff (PAS)‐positive granules in the cytoplasm were digested by diastase,
indicating that they contained glycogen (PAS stain, × 400). (b) Immunohistochemically, tumor cells showed diffuse membranous positivity for
MIC2 (CD99) (immunoperoxidase stain, × 400). (c) Tumor cells were focally positive for chromogranin A (immunoperoxidase stain, × 400). (d)
Tumor cells were focal and moderately positive for synaptophysin (immunoperoxidase stain, × 400). Immunohistochemical study showed diffuse
membranous positivity for MIC2 (CD99) and focal cytoplasmic positivity for NSE, chromogranin A, and synaptophysin (Fig 3b–d). Cytokeratins
(AE1/AE3, CAM5.2), leukocyte common antigen (CD45RB), S‐100 protein, muscle specific actin (HHF35), desmin, thyroid transcription factor 1
(TTF‐1), calretinin, and WT‐1 were negative. Based on these pathological findings, EFT was strongly suspected. Thus, fluorescence in situ
hybridization (FISH) was performed on a section from the paraffin‐embedded biopsy specimen, using an EWSR1 (22q12) dual‐color, break‐apart
rearrangement probe. The analysis revealed break‐apart signals of EWSR1 in more than 70 of the 200 tumor cells (Fig 4). The result, in
combination with the cytopathological findings, yielded the diagnosis of pulmonary EFT. Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) exhibited
EWSR1 (22q12) break‐apart (splitting) signals in more than 70 of the 200 cells, indicating a translocation of the EWSR1 gene. Yellow or
red/green signals indicate wild‐type EWSR1, while separate green and red signals (arrows) indicate a translocation of chromosome 22q12
(FISH, × 1000). We report the first detailed cytological findings of pulmonary EFT in the oldest pulmonary EFT patient recorded. FNAC
findings were basically similar to those of EFTs in other organs.3, 4 A uniform population of discohesive round cells with larger and
smaller cells may be a characteristic feature. Since the first case of possible pulmonary PNET was reported in 1989, 42 cases of primary
pulmonary EFTs have been reported in English literature.5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12 The mean patient age is 28 years (8–67 years), slightly
older than in the EFT of bone and soft tissue (mean 20 years), but most patients are adolescents or young adults. Our patient was 70 years
old, making him the oldest pulmonary EFT patient reported so far. Because MIC2 is expressed in many small round cell tumors, cytogenetic
analysis of EWSR1 translocation is recommended to confirm diagnosis.1 Only 10 cases of pulmonary EFT have been confirmed via translocation
by reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction or by FISH, including the present case.8, 10, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16 Differential diagnosis
of pulmonary EFT comprises many other small round cell malignancies, such as small cell carcinoma, carcinoid, small cell type of squamous
cell carcinoma, nuclear protein in testis midline carcinoma, malignant lymphoma, desmoplastic small round cell tumor (DSRCT), and poorly
differentiated synovial sarcoma. Differentiation from these diseases is important because of different prognostic/therapeutic implications.
In addition to an epithelial morphology, carcinomas are generally immunoreactive for cytokeratins and non‐reactive for MIC2.
Immunohistochemical study with TTF1, cytokeratin 5/6, p63, and/or p40 is also helpful. Malignant lymphomas exhibit more irregular nuclear
contour, chromatins, and lymphoglandular bodies, and exhibit lymphoid markers. Cytological findings of DSRCT are limited and differentiation
from EFT is challenging. DSCRT may present a rosette‐like appearance and sometimes exhibits immunoreactivity for MIC2. However, DSCRT
usually shows more smudged chromatin and nuclear moldings, and immunoreactivity of both cytokeratin and desmin. Synovial sarcomas rarely
occur in the lung or in older patients, and cytopathological differentiation of the poorly differentiated variant of EFT may also be
challenging. Synovial sarcomas tend to show more spindle morphology than EFTs and are immunoreactive for transducer‐like enhancer of split‐1
protein (TLE1) and more for epithelial markers. Pulmonary EFT prognosis is poor. In reported studies, about half of the patients died of
their disease 1–54 months (median, 11 months; n = 18) after diagnosis.7, 12, 13, 14, 15, 17, 18, 19, 20 Radical surgical resection at early
stages with multiagent chemotherapy would more likely obtain a better outcome.12 Important prognostic factors of EFT include the stage,
anatomical location, and size of the tumor.1 Although primary visceral EFTs may be associated with more aggressive biological behavior than
those of the soft tissue, larger series with concurrent statistical analysis are needed to validate this finding.12 Previous reports have
indicated that young age at the time of the diagnosis was associated with favorable prognosis; however, others have reported that event‐free
and overall survival were essentially comparable in the younger and older groups.21, 22 Our study reports the cytopathological findings of
pulmonary EFT for the first time. When two populations of uniform round cells are observed with thickened nuclear membranes, dispersed
chromatin, and scanty cytoplasm, EFT must be considered, regardless of age, to allow early surgical resection and aggressive chemotherapy.
No authors report any conflict of interest. This study was supported by Grants‐in‐Aid for Scientific Research by the Japan Society for the
Promotion of Science (Grant Number 26460660).
