Human influenza is a contagious respiratory illness caused by the influenza virus. The influenza vaccination is recommended annually, but
several adverse effects related to allergic reactions have been reported. Panic attacks are also known to occur, but no case of a panic
attack adverse effect has been reported in South Korea. We present two cases of panic disorder patients whose symptoms were aggravated by
the influenza vaccination. We assumed that dysregulation of T-lymphocytes in panic disorder patients could have a role in activating various
kinds of cytokines and chemokines, which then can lead to panic attack aggravation. Influenza is a contagious respiratory illness caused by
the influenza viruses. Since the 1940s, inactivated influenza vaccines have been introduced,1) and they decreased the mortality of influenza
by 41%.2) However, there were also reports on the side effects of the influenza vaccination, including injection site pain, swelling,
fatigue, fever, and allergic reactions, including anaphylaxis.3) There were also reports on panic attacks following influenza vaccination.4)
However, the mechanisms of a panic attack occurrence after the vaccination have been not revealed, and few cases have been reported globally
so far. We present the cases of two panic disorder patients who suffered panic attacks after receiving the influenza vaccine in South Korea.
A 51 year-old woman who had been treated for a panic disorder since 2004 visited our outpatient clinic and was admitted with symptoms of
chest tightness, palpitation, dyspnea, and a tingling sensation of the hands and legs in September of 2014. She underwent a chest X-ray and
electrocardiography (EKG), and her thyroid hormone levels were checked, but no specific abnormality was found. She was diagnosed with a
panic disorder, and took mirtazapine 7.5 mg/day, escitalopram 5 mg/day, and lorazepam 1 mg/day. She was admitted for 2 weeks and discharged
when her symptoms were alleviated. She visited our outpatient clinic regularly, and was stable on her medications. In November 2014, her
feelings of choking, palpitation, chest tightness, and tingling senses were aggravated. She had no history of allergic reaction, but was
worried about the influenza vaccination, which she had received the day before. She said her symptoms waxed and waned, and lasted over 24
hours. We recommended her to visit the emergency room, but she visited outpatient clinic several days after when her symptoms spontaneously
resolved. She took an additional alprazolam 0.5 mg/day, and sustained treatment in the outpatient clinic without extra panic attacks or
additional admissions. A 45 year-old man diagnosed with a panic disorder in April 2014 visited our outpatient clinic in June of 2014. He was
suffering from sudden chest discomfort, sweating, and light-headedness. He had experienced the symptoms for more than 10 minutes, but
negative test results were found on his EKG, chest X-ray, and blood tests. He had severe anticipatory anxiety, and we decided him to admit
in July of 2014. He took paroxetine CR 37.5 mg/day, trazodone 25 mg/day, alprazolam 0.75 mg/day. After one month of treatment, he felt his
symptoms had improved, and was discharged. But, in November of 2014, he experienced aggravated symptoms for several hours, directly after he
received the influenza vaccination. He had no history of allergic reaction, and voluntarily visited the outpatient clinic, and was admitted
for panic attack aggravation. In the early stage of admission, he underwent panic attacks once a week, despite of negative test results on
EKG and blood tests. After he was prescribed with additional tianeptine 25 mg/day, his symptoms improved, and he was discharged one month
later, after being panic attack-free for a week. Both patients in our case report gave informed consent for the publication of case report.
They received a trivalent inactivated influenza vaccine, including type A antigens (California/7/2009 , Victoria/361/2011 ) and a type B
antigen (Massachusetts/02/2012). Adjuvants, preservatives, or stabilizers, such as formaldehyde, gentamycin, deoxycholic acid were also
included in vaccine, but thimerosal was not included. In general, there are immunologic and non-immunologic mechanisms that cause the side
effects of vaccination. The fear of injection, inappropriate injection site, and poor hygiene of healthcare workers can be related to the
non-immunologic factors,5) but our case, neither patient had a history of previous injection fear. Both of patients had been taken annual
vaccination of influenza for more than 10 years, but did not experience substantial side effect of vaccination or have anxiety of being
vaccinated. The patients were vaccinated by well-trained healthcare workers in hospitals. We could assume that our patients’ side effects
were caused directly by the vaccine itself. Therefore, we assumed that our patients’ side effects were panic attack aggravation, despite of
the limitation that we retrospectively examined our patients’ symptoms, and there could be difficulty of attributing panic attack
aggravation purely on vaccination. We considered that the differences of vaccination’s composition may cause the immunologic reaction in the
patients who received the influenza vaccination in the November 2014. The mechanism of a panic attack following vaccination is not fully
explained, but the immunological change might have role in this process. Currently, only split vaccines derived from the envelope of virus
are used in South Korea.3) Various types of immunoglobulin react with the vaccine in our bodies, and these antigen-antibody reactions are
supported by the T and B lymphocytes. CD4, CD8 T-lymphocyte activated by the vaccine regulate the B-lymphocyte, which differentiates into
its plasma cell and memory cell roles in recognizing and remembering the virus, respectively. However, an extremely activated immune system
can result in a hypersensitive reaction.6) Panic disorders are also known to have immunological pathophysiology. Previous studies have led
to an increased recognition that pro-inflammatory cytokines could enhance the activity of enzymes related to the degradation of
neurotransmitters.7,8) A broad spectrum of cytokine abnormalities, which suggest a generalized inflammatory state, have been shown to be
present in individuals with panic disorder.9) Several studies have shown that stress can activate or inhibit the immune system, thus
modulating the number of T-lymphocytes.10,11) Preliminary study also showed that T-lymphocytes have high-affinity cholecystokinin receptors,
which induce symptoms comparable to those of panic attack.12) There was also a study that revealed that increased CD3, CD4, and CD8
T-lymphocyte, and decreased CD 19 B-lymphocyte were found in panic disorder patients with pharmacological treatment.13) With this
information, we assumed that the T-lymphocyte could mediate the panic attack following the vaccination. Through the antiviral process,
various kind of cytokines and chemokines regulated by abnormal T-lymphocytes in panic disorder patients might have roles in the aggravation
of panic attacks.6) However, other studies have shown that there was no difference in T-lymphocyte subsets between panic disorder patients
and control groups.14,15) There should be more consideration for these results, and the precise molecular mechanisms of antiviral
immunologic pathways should be studied further. To our knowledge, this is the first case report of influenza vaccine-associated panic
attacks. There were common immunological factors shown in the vaccination and panic attack, which are mainly explained by T-lymphocyte
dysregulation. However, few studies have been performed or report on these potential mechanisms. Further studies are required to understand
the precise mechanism of a panic attack induced by vaccination. Although there are many different arguments, we hope our report will lead
clinicians to monitor their patients for the vaccination’s potential adverse effect.
