Mitotically active cellular fibroma (MACF) of the ovary, characterized by relatively high mitotic activity without severe atypia, represents
a relatively new disease entity. MACF is categorized as a benign ovarian tumor. However, due to a limited number of case reports, its
clinical and pathological features and optimum management remains largely undetermined. Herein, we report on a rare case of MACF that grew
rapidly in size and was diagnosed on detailed pathological examination. A 44-year-old Japanese woman, who detected a myoma-like lesion
1-year earlier, was referred to our hospital when the follow-up examination demonstrated that the mass had increased in size. Magnetic
resonance imaging revealed a T1 isointense and T2 hyperintense tumor (11 cm in diameter) in the right pelvic cavity. Laparoscopy confirmed
the presence of a right ovarian tumor and laparoscopic right adnexectomy was performed. The tumor cells consisted of dense cellular
proliferations of spindle fibroblast-like cells without significant cytological atypia. The mitotic activity index was estimated at >15
mitotic figures per 10 high-power fields. Reticulin staining and FOXL2 mutation analysis excluded the possibility of an adult granulosa cell
tumor, and the patient was diagnosed with a MACF of the ovary. To the best of our knowledge, we are the first to report on a case of rapid
growth of a MACF of the ovary during follow-up. When an increase in the size of a solid ovarian mass is detected, a MACF should be
considered as a differential diagnosis. Ovarian fibrous tumors were previously classified as benign fibromas or malignant fibrosarcomas,
according to the World Health Organization’s classification of tumors of the breast & Female Genital Origans . Ovarian cellular fibromas
were defined as having a mitotic figure of <3 per 10 high-power fields without severe nuclear atypia, and fibrosarcomas were defined as
having a mitotic figure of ≥4 per 10 high-power fields with severe nuclear atypia . Generally, the prognosis of patients with fibrosarcomas
is extremely poor . However, there have been a minority of cases where the patient was categorized as having fibrosarcoma with mild nuclear
atypia, despite a high mitotic activity. These patients were associated with a relatively favorable prognosis . In 2006, Irving et al.
defined these types of tumors as mitotically active cellular fibromas (MACFs), thus, distinguishing them from fibrosarcomas. Accordingly,
MACFs have now been included under the heading of fibromas in the 2014 World Health Organization classification system . MACFs are defined
as having a mitotic figure of <3 per 10 high-power fields without severe nuclear atypia and fibrosarcomas are defined as having a mitotic
figure of ≥4 per 10 high-power fields with severe nuclear atypia . Several case reports have been published since MACFs were defined . MACFs
are associated with a more favorable prognosis than fibrosarcomas, with limited data on long-term survival rates available . However, the
natural history of MACFs is still largely unknown and suitable guidelines for diagnosing and treating this condition are lacking. Herein, we
report on the clinical and histopathological characteristics of a rare case of rapid growth of a MACF of the ovary that almost doubled in
size during a 1-year follow-up period and provide a review of the literature. A 44-year-old Japanese woman underwent a medical examination
for health check reasons at her local hospital. An ultrasound scan revealed a uterine myoma-like lesion, 5.9 cm in diameter. The patient
revisited the hospital 12-months later for a follow-up examination. In that time, the lesion had increased to approximately twice its size.
The patient was referred to our clinic for a detailed examination. At the first internal examination, the body of the uterus was enlarged to
the size of a newborn head; cervical and vaginal discharge was unremarkable. The adnexa were not palpable on both sides. The patient’s blood
test results were normal. Transvaginal ultrasonography detected an isoechoic solid mass with an ill-defined boundary between the lesion and
the uterus (Fig. 1a). A tumor, 110 × 90 × 80 mm in size, was revealed in the right pelvic cavity by magnetic resonance imaging. The tumor
exhibited a slightly lobular pattern with smooth margins. The internal mass had a density similar to that of myometrium on abdominal,
T1-weighted magnetic resonance imaging and a low density on T2-weighted magnetic resonance imaging in the horizontal plane (Fig. 1b).
Several flow void regions (a bridging vascular sign) were detected between the lesion and the uterus. These findings suggested a subserous
myoma. However, the continuity of the lesion and the uterus was unclear. Since we were unable to identify the right ovary, a fibroma/thecoma
of the right ovary was considered as a differential diagnosis (Fig. 1c). The left ovary did not exhibit any abnormalities. At this point, a
preliminary clinical diagnosis of subserous myoma was made and a laparoscopic myomectomy was planned. The laparoscopic findings demonstrated
a 10-cm right ovarian mass without intra-abdominal adhesion or rupture of the tumor. The uterus and left appendages were normal in size
(Fig. 2). A laparoscopic right adnexectomy was subsequently performed. The ascitic fluid was serous, and the cytological evaluation was
negative.Fig. 1Preoperative transvaginal ultrasonography (a) detected an isoechoic solid mass in the right pelvic cavity (approximately
10 cm in size) with an ill-defined boundary between the lesion and the uterus, and T2-weighted magnetic resonance imaging of the ovarian
tumor in (b) the horizontal and (c) the sagittal planes Fig. 2Laparoscopic findings. The uterus was of a normal size and the mass was a
right ovarian tumor Preoperative transvaginal ultrasonography (a) detected an isoechoic solid mass in the right pelvic cavity (approximately
10 cm in size) with an ill-defined boundary between the lesion and the uterus, and T2-weighted magnetic resonance imaging of the ovarian
tumor in (b) the horizontal and (c) the sagittal planes Laparoscopic findings. The uterus was of a normal size and the mass was a right
ovarian tumor Macroscopically, the cut surface of the tumor was homogeneous and solid in appearance with a yellowish-white pigment. Necrosis
and hemorrhage were absent within the tumor (Fig. 3a, b). Microscopic images are depicted in Fig. 4a–d. The capsule of the tumor was intact
without necrosis and hemorrhage (Fig. 4a). The tumor cells consisted of dense cellular proliferations of spindle fibroblast-like cells,
arranged in a fascicular structure, without significant cytological atypia (Fig. 4b). In addition, a portion of the tumor cells proliferated
in a trabecular pattern and a collagen band was distributed around the stroma (Fig. 4c). The tumor was composed of cells with ovoid to
spindle-shaped nuclei and a scant cytoplasm. Some of the nuclei had a nuclear groove. No severe cytological atypia was detected. The mitotic
activity index was estimated at >15 mitotic figures per 10 high-power fields (Fig. 4d). Pathological differential diagnoses included a
cellular fibroma, fibrosarcoma and adult granulosa cell tumor (AGCT).Fig. 3Macroscopic image of the right ovarian tumor. The cut surface of
the tumor was homogeneous and solid in appearance with a yellowish-white pigment Fig. 4Histopathological findings of the right ovarian
tumor. a The capsule of the tumor was intact without necrosis and hemorrhage; (b) dense cellular proliferations of spindle fibroblast-like
cells, arranged in a fascicular structure with ovoid to spindle-shaped nuclei and a scant cytoplasm, and (c) tumor cell proliferations in a
trabecular pattern with a collagen band distributed around the stroma; and (d) absence of significant cytological atypia. The mitotic
activity index was estimated at >15 mitotic figures per 10 high-power fields (hematoxylin and eosin staining; original magnification × 20,
[b, c] × 100, and × 400) Macroscopic image of the right ovarian tumor. The cut surface of the tumor was homogeneous and solid in appearance
with a yellowish-white pigment Histopathological findings of the right ovarian tumor. a The capsule of the tumor was intact without necrosis
and hemorrhage; (b) dense cellular proliferations of spindle fibroblast-like cells, arranged in a fascicular structure with ovoid to
spindle-shaped nuclei and a scant cytoplasm, and (c) tumor cell proliferations in a trabecular pattern with a collagen band distributed
around the stroma; and (d) absence of significant cytological atypia. The mitotic activity index was estimated at >15 mitotic figures per 10
high-power fields (hematoxylin and eosin staining; original magnification × 20, [b, c] × 100, and × 400) Immunohistochemical staining was
positive for vimentin, muscle-specific actin, alpha-smooth muscle actin, alpha-inhibin and progesterone receptor (Fig. 5a–e), and negative
for calretinin, epithelial membrane antigen, desmin, estrogen receptor, CD10, CD99, chromogranin A, synaptophysin and tumor protein p53. The
Ki-67/MIB-1 labeling index was 9.5 % (Fig. 5f). Reticulin staining showed reticular fibers surrounding each cell (Fig. 5g). This was not a
typical feature of AGCT. We further analyzed genomic DNA (isolated from formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded tumor tissue sections) for a FOXL2
c.402C > G (p.C134W) point mutation that is observed in the majority of AGCT patients [18, 19]. The FOXL2 mutation was detected in the AGCT
case used as a positive control, but was absent from our case and the negative control (Fig. 6). Because necrosis and hemorrhage were not
detected macro- or microscopically, a fibrosarcoma was ruled out. After performing the differential diagnoses outlined above, a final
diagnosis of MACF was confirmed. Having obtained written informed consent, we evaluated the patient’s risk of recurrence. Based on our
recommendation and the preference of the patient, we performed radical surgery (simple hysterectomy, left adnexectomy and omentectomy). The
patient is undergoing regular follow-up. Recurrence of the tumor has not been observed in the 2-year postsurgical period.Fig.
5Immunohistochemical analysis of the right ovarian tumor exhibiting positivity for (a) vimentin, (b) muscle-specific actin, (c) alpha-smooth
muscle actin, (d) alpha-inhibin and (e) estrogen receptor. f The Ki-67/MIB-1 labeling index was 9.5 % (original magnification × 200). g
Reticulin staining showed reticular fibers surrounding each tumor cell (original magnification × 100) Fig. 6Analysis of a c.402C > G point
mutation in the FOXL2 gene in (a) the normal control (negative; blue circle), (b) the adult granulosa cell tumor patient used as a positive
control (positive; red circle), and (c) our patient with rapid growth of mitotically active cellular fibroma (negative; blue circle)
Immunohistochemical analysis of the right ovarian tumor exhibiting positivity for (a) vimentin, (b) muscle-specific actin, (c) alpha-smooth
muscle actin, (d) alpha-inhibin and (e) estrogen receptor. f The Ki-67/MIB-1 labeling index was 9.5 % (original magnification × 200). g
Reticulin staining showed reticular fibers surrounding each tumor cell (original magnification × 100) Analysis of a c.402C > G point
mutation in the FOXL2 gene in (a) the normal control (negative; blue circle), (b) the adult granulosa cell tumor patient used as a positive
control (positive; red circle), and (c) our patient with rapid growth of mitotically active cellular fibroma (negative; blue circle) MACF
was first defined by Irving et al. in 2006, based on a review of 75 cellular fibroma cases. The authors reported that the majority of MACF
patients have a good clinical course compared to fibrosarcoma patients. However, there was a case where death was associated with peritoneal
adhesion and capsule rupture and Irving et al. could not necessarily conclude it to be a benign tumor. Therefore, pathological differential
diagnoses of ovarian fibromatous tumors (including cellular fibroma, MACF and fibrosarcoma) are important since they influence decision-
making, as well as, the prognosis of different treatment strategies. Only six MACF cases have been reported since a definition of MACF was
established in 2006 (Table 1). The natural history of MACF is still largely unknown. Five (83.3 %) of these recently reported cases were
given a diagnosis of ovarian tumor. However, there has not been a single case where a diagnosis of MACF was confirmed preoperatively.
Because there are no clinically useful serum tumor markers for MACF, or characteristic imaging findings, a preoperative diagnosis of MACF
remains challenging at this time. There was a case report where the size of the tumor did not change during 10-years of follow-up . In
contrast, there was also a case report where a recurrent tumor, 8 cm in diameter, was detected in the pararectal region after 6 months of
follow-up. In our case, a mass of 6 cm was found to have almost doubled in size, to 10 cm, during a 1-year follow-up period. Thus, when a
solid ovarian tumor increases in size, even though malignancy findings are not found considering preoperative serum tumor marker values or
imaging findings, MACF may well be included as a candidate for the differential diagnosis. In the 6 case reports published since the paper
by Irving et al. , 5 patients (83.3 %) underwent open surgery, including a unilateral salpingo-oophorectomy in 2 patients [11, 13] and a
radical operation (bilateral oophorectomy and hysterectomy) in 3 patients [12, 14, 15]. One patient treated with laparoscopic oophorectomy
was reported by Yamada et al. in 2015. However, because the follow-up period remains limited, the long-term prognosis has yet to be
determined. No standard treatment for MACF currently exists, although overtreatment should be avoided in women requiring preservation of
fecundity [2, 3]. Zong et al. suggested that other risk factors, such as tumor size, growth rate and Ki-67 positivity, should be considered.
As our case grew rapidly, the tumor size was relatively large, and the patient did not wish to conceive, we concluded that radical surgery
was a reasonable option. Moreover, because there were no signs of recurrence, complete resection was not necessary for administering
chemotherapy for the tumor associated with capsule rupture and peritoneal adhesion . In contrast, there was a case where recurrence occurred
5-years after surgery . Therefore, we believe long-term follow-up is necessary.Table 1Literature review of reported cases of mitotically
active cellular fibromaImmunohistochemistryAuthor(s)Age (y)Size (cm)PDRuptureAdhesionSurgeryMitoses (MF/10 HRP)Ki-67 PIVimentinSMAα-
inhibinCalretininEMAPrognosisKaku et al. 326.6 × 6.0 × 4.4OT––LSO1750++NDNDND12 month NEDBucella et al. 6510.0 (First)OT––TAH,
BSO49+NDFocal+NDNDRecurrence twice NED12.0 (Second)8.0 (Third)Monteiro et al. 1319.0 × 15.0 × 12.0OT–OmentumRSO, OMT5–7NDNDNDNDNDND36 month
NEDWu et al. 769.0 × 6.0 × 5.0PM––TAH, BSO5–9>10+ND+––NDZong et al. 3910.0 × 7.0 × 4.0OT+Left latum & uterusTAH, LSO, OMT, AD,
LD3–510++NDND–66 month NEDYamada et al. 366.0OTND–LS (RSO)108.7+NDFocal+––6 month NEDPresent case445.9 (First)Myoma––LS (First), TAH, LSO,
OMT (Second)6.79.5++Focal+––26 month NED11.0 (Second) Abbreviations: α alpha, AD appendectomy, BSO bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy, EMA
epithelial membrane antigen, HRP high power field, LD lymph node dissection, LS laparoscopic surgery, LSO left salpingo-oophorectomy, MF
mitotic figure, ND not described, NED no evidence of disease, OMT omentectomy, OT ovarian tumor, PD preoperative diagnosis, PI proliferative
index, PM pelvic mass, RSO right salpingo-oophorectomy, SMA smooth muscle actin, TAH total abdominal hysterectomy, y year, + positive, −
negative Literature review of reported cases of mitotically active cellular fibroma Abbreviations: α alpha, AD appendectomy, BSO bilateral
salpingo-oophorectomy, EMA epithelial membrane antigen, HRP high power field, LD lymph node dissection, LS laparoscopic surgery, LSO left
salpingo-oophorectomy, MF mitotic figure, ND not described, NED no evidence of disease, OMT omentectomy, OT ovarian tumor, PD preoperative
diagnosis, PI proliferative index, PM pelvic mass, RSO right salpingo-oophorectomy, SMA smooth muscle actin, TAH total abdominal
hysterectomy, y year, + positive, − negative MACFs are defined as cellular fibromas with a high mitotic activity index (≥4 mitotic figures
per 10 high-power fields) and mild to moderate nuclear atypia . The differential diagnosis with fibrosarcoma is possible for nuclear atypia
and the presence of necrosis and hemorrhage. There is a difficult case for the histological differential diagnosis of cellular fibroma and
AGCT (especially the diffuse type) . Cellular fibromas and AGCTs are represented by the sex cord-stromal tumors [1, 10]. However, the
majority of borderline malignant sex cord-stromal tumors are AGCTs . Therefore, the differential diagnosis with commonly benign cellular
fibroma is important. The FOXL2 c.402C > G (p.C134W) point mutation is detected in 95.0 % of AGCT patients, especially those with the
diffuse type . It has been described that this point mutation does not reflect immunohistochemical staining pattern of FOXL2 . In addition,
the pattern of reticulin staining is different for these disease entities. Thus, combination of FOXL2 point mutation analysis and reticulin
staining can be employed in differential diagnosis of cellular fibroma and AGCT. In this case, we rejected a diagnosis of AGCT based on
FOXL2 mutation analysis and reticulin staining, and confirmed a final diagnosis of MACF. We report our experience of a case of rapid growth
of a MACF of the ovary during a 1-year follow-up period. When preoperative serum tumor marker levels and/or imaging findings do not suggest
ovarian cancer in instances of rapid growth of a solid ovarian mass, MACF should be considered as a differential diagnosis. Our case and
review of the literature suggest that MACF of the ovary may represent a heterogeneous disease entity that requires an accumulation of case
reports to establish diagnosis and treatment. Adult granulosa cell tumor Mitotically active cellular fibroma We wish to thank Editage
(https://www.editage.jp) for English language editing. This research received no specific financial or material support. All available data
are included in the manuscript and its figures. KM and ST collected clinical data and drafted the manuscript. YA and MN revised the final
version of the manuscript for important intellectual content. KM and MN conducted the pathological evaluation of the specimen and assisted
in editing the pathology. KM, AK and KY performed the genetic analysis. ST, SY, SM, AF and TM performed the clinical diagnosis and
treatment. All authors read and approved the final version of the manuscript prior to submission. The authors declare that they have no
competing interests. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this case report and any accompanying images.
A copy of the consent form is available on request for review by the Editor of this journal. Not applicable.
