Neuroleptic malignant syndrome (NMS) is one of the most severe iatrogenic emergencies in clinical service. The symptoms including sudden
consciousness change, critical temperature elevation and electrolytes imbalance followed by mutli-organ system failure were common in NMS.
In addition to aggressive interventions with intravenous fluid resuscitation and antipyretics, several antidotes have been suggested to
prevent further progression of the muscle damage. Dantrolene has been reported to be one of the most effective treatments for NMS. However,
the adverse effects of dantrolene treatment for NMS have not yet been evaluated thoroughly. Here we report a young male patient with bipolar
I disorder who developed NMS after rapid tranquilization with haloperidol. Dantrolene was given intravenously for the treatment of NMS.
However, fever accompanied with local tenderness, hardness with clear border and swelling with heat over the patient’s left forearm occurred
on the sixth day of dantrolene treatment. Venous thromboembolism (VTE) over intravenous indwelling site at the patient’s forearm was noted
and confirmed by Doppler ultrasound. The patient’s VTE recovered after heparin and warfarin thrombolytic therapy. To our knowledge, this is
the first case report demonstrating the possible relationship between dantrolene use and VTE in a patient with antipsychotic treatment.
Although the causal relationship and the underlying pathogenesis require further studies, dantrolene should be used with caution for
patients with NMS. Neuroleptic malignant syndrome (NMS) is a life threatening complication of antipsychotic treatment. Dantrolene is one of
the treatments for NMS.1) Here we reported a case whose NMS was successfully treated with dantrolene. The patient later experienced venous
thromboembolism (VTE). This is the first report of VTE after dantrolene treatment in a patient with antipsychotic treatment. The 18 year-old
male was hospitalized due to irritable mood and poor impulse control for 2 weeks. He also had inflated self-esteem, decreased need for
sleep, distractibility, disorganized behavior and psychomotor agitation. Bipolar I disorder, manic episode, was diagnosed according to the
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders 5th edition and valproic acid 1,000 mg combined with sulpiride 600 mg daily were
given. The patient had physical threatening toward ward staff and destructive behavior to objects. Rapid tranquilization with haloperidol
was applied. Totally 45 mg of haloperidol was given in 4 days. NMS with high fever, muscular rigidity, elevated blood pressure and
tachycardia accompanied with drowsiness was noted 3 days after rapid tranquilization. The fever lasted for 2 days, with the highest core
temperature up to 40.7°C even under regular (every 6 hours) antipyretic treatment. Laboratory tests showed leukocytosis, elevated creatinine
phosphokinase (3,428 μg/L), elevated myoglobin level (717.6 ng/ml) and elevated aminotransferase level. All psychotropics were discontinued
immediately. Hydration and dantrolene 100 mg every 12 hours were given intravenously (the patient’s body weight was 90 kg) according to the
instruction of the medicine (initially, ≥1 mg/kg via rapid intravenous injection, may repeat if necessary, up to a total dose of 10 mg/kg).
The patient’s NMS subsided after a total of 640 mg of dantrolene treatment in 5 days. His consciousness fully recovered and the creatinine
phosphokinase declined to 183 μg/L. On the next day after dantrolene treatment, local tenderness and swelling with heat appeared over the
patient’s left forearm where the IV line was indwelt. The d-dimer level was 1.7 mg/L. Under the impression of cellulitis, cefadroxil
monohydrate 1 g per day was given. The antibiotics were shifted to IV form cefazoline 1 g every 8 hours, then to teicoplanin 400 mg every 12
hours. However, the lesion extended to the upper arm. The d-dimer level rose to 3.45 mg/L. Color Doppler ultrasound showed left antecubital
VTE. Dantrolene was discontinued and thrombolytic treatment by IV heparin was given. Heparin was shifted to warfarin 2 days later. The
swelling and tenderness faded after 6 days of thrombolytic treatment. Follow-up Doppler ultrasound 4 weeks later showed improvement of
forearm VTE. The clinical course of the patient is shown in Fig. 1. The patient was discharged one month later with quetiapine and valproate
therapy. The incidence of venous thrombosis was higher in schizophrenia patients than in general population.2) Risks factors include
immobilization,3) prolonged physical restraint4) and antipsychotic use.5) NMS per se is a risk factor for thromboembolism6) because fever
may induce hemoconcentration and rhabdomyolysis may worsen the hypercoagulation. It is proven that dantrolene, bromocriptine and amantadine
alone reduce mortality rate caused by NMS, from 21 percent in conservative treatment group to 8.6%, 7.8%, 5.9% respectively.7) Dantrolene
depresses the excitation-contraction coupling in skeletal muscle by binding to the ryanodine receptor and decreasing free intracellular
calcium concentration which modify muscle rigidity and reverse heat generation from muscle.1,8) However, it is possible that dantrolene
causes muscle weakness thereby inducing thrombogenesis although this has not yet been verified. Brandom et al. reported a 9% incidence of
phlebitis associated with dantrolene use.9) This complication is relatively high and should be anticipated in any patient who receives
dantrolene. Grodofsky et al.10) also reported a case of upper extremity VTE after dantrolene treatment for malignant hyperthermia. This
patient was not immobilized for long time during the hospitalization. He did not have dyslipidemia or hyperglycemia. The possibility of
antipsychotics-induced VTE was low due to brief use of antipsychotics (10 days). The patient’s VTE was most likely to be caused by
dantrolene for the following reasons. First, the lesion extended from the IV-catheter site over the ulnar vein. Second, VTE over upper
extremities was extremely rare. Third, the symptoms of the VTE started after dantrolene use and improved after the discontinuation of
dantrolene. Despite the aforementioned reasons, the causal relationship and pathogenesis between dantrolene and VTE needs to be confirmed by
further studies. Although dantrolene relieves NMS symptoms, the complications including phlebitis and venous thrombosis limit its clinical
application. Furthermore, this patient developed VTE after receiving dantrolene with the dosage lower than recommended by Malignant
Hyperthermia Association of the United States (2.5 mg/kg, http://www.mhaus.org). Oral administration of dantrolene may be less risky in
causing venous complications; however, patients with unclear consciousness or who are uncooperative still need IV dantrolene treatment.
Future research is needed to describe different rates of phlebitis in patients who received different formulations of dantrolene. Further
study may also focus on reducing dantrolene-induced side-effect by establishing standard protocol and developing better treatment for NMS.
The progression of symptoms of the patient.
