Serotonin syndrome (SS) is a potentially life-threatening condition associated with increased serotonergic activity in central nervous
system and may occur during the use of serotonergic drugs. Although increasing frequency of serotonergic drug use in children,
pediatricians, emergency medicine and pediatric intensive care specialists have not enough knowledge and experience about SS that is a
potentially life-threatening condition. A 12-year-old girl patient was admitted to our emergency room with the history of involuntary
contractions on her extremities and alteration of consciousness. Her physical examination showed agitation, hyperthermia, dilated pupils,
tremor, increased deep tendon reflexes, positive spontaneous clonus, agitation, flushed skin and diaphoresis, excessive perspiration, and
continuous horizontal ocular movements. The patient diagnosed as SS by clinical history, physical and laboratory findings. In this paper, we
will discuss SS occurred in a 12-year-old girl after concurrent clomipramine and risperidone use. Serotonin syndrome (SS) is a potentially
life-threatening condition associated with increased serotonergic activity in central nervous system. SS may occur during the use of
serotonergic drugs. Clinical findings include mental state alterations, autonomic hyperactivity and neuromuscular excitability.1)
Neuroleptic malignant syndrome, anticholinergic toxicity, malignant hyperthermia, sympathomimetic agent intoxications, central nervous
system infections should be considered in differential diagnosis.1,2) Although there are limited numbers of pediatric case reports
concerning SS,3–9) making the diagnosis of SS is more difficult in children. In this paper, we will discuss SS occurred in a 12-year-old
girl after concurrent clomipramine and risperidone use. A 12-year-old girl was admitted to emergency room with the history of involuntary
contractions on her extremities and alteration of consciousness. The diagnosis of epilepsy and status epilepticus was made based on her
clinical history at onset. The case was hospitalized to pediatric intensive care unit. Heart rate was 140 pulses/minute, her body
temperature was 39.5°C, oxygen saturation was 99% and blood pressure was 120/60 mmHg. Her physical examination showed agitation,
hyperthermia, dilated pupils, tremor, increased deep tendon reflexes, positive spontaneous clonus, agitation, flushed skin and diaphoresis,
excessive perspiration, and continuous horizontal ocular movements. There were no meningeal irritation signs. We suspect the diagnosis of
epilepsy and status epilepticus because of incompatible physical signs and symptoms. Detailed clinical history was retaken and physical
examination was repeated. Repeated examination showed that nail biting and clues of self-injury behavior. We learned that she has been
living with her stepmother and irregularly receiving risperidone for a week prescribed by psychiatry clinic. She had behavioral problems
such as stealing money, lying, and escaping from home and school. She had taken nine pills of 75 mg clomipramine tablets for suicidal
attempt, which were belonging to her stepmother, in one day. Her abnormal blood chemistry test results were high creatinine kinase and
myoglobin levels (creatinine kinase 2,823 U/L [0–145 U/L]; myoglobin 112 ng/ml [0–7 ng/ml]). Urea, creatinine, Na, K, aspartate
transaminase, alanine transaminase, complete blood count, prothrombin time, activated partial thromboplastin time, electroencephalography
and brain computed tomography results were normal. The patient has diagnosed as SS. Clomipramine was discontinued, oral diazepam and
intravenous hydration was started. Clinical symptoms of the patient disappeared in 24 hours. Two days later, creatinine kinase level
regressed to 755 U/L and myoglobin level regressed to 15 ng/ml. The patient was consulted to child and adolescent psychiatry clinic as she
had suicidal attempt and thoughts of self-injury. The patient’s physical examination and laboratory test results returned to the normal
ranges four days later and she was discharged from the hospital under the supervision of child and adolescent psychiatry clinic. Serotonin
is one of the most important neurotransmitters affecting mental health.10) SS is result from serotonergic overstimulation of serotonin
receptors. The frequency of serotonergic drug use in pediatric age group is increasing. Serotonergic drugs may use in treatment of many
pediatric, psychiatric and neurologic conditions such as migraine, depression, anxiety disorder and obsessive-compulsive disorders.
Serotonin is a neurotransmitter produced by presynaptic neurons. There are central and peripheral serotonin receptors. Central serotonin
receptors are involved in behavior, mood, sleep-wakefulness cycles, muscular tone and thermoregulation; on the other hand peripheral
receptors are involved in gastrointestinal mobility and vascular tone.11) Clinical findings of SS are related to central and peripheral
receptors. Although increasing frequency of serotonergic drug use in children, pediatricians, emergency medicine and pediatric intensive
care specialists have not enough knowledge and experience about SS that is a potentially life-threatening condition. Making the diagnosis of
SS in children is more difficult than adults.12) Manifestations may be falsely attributed to another cause in mild cases. On the other hand,
children may not be able to communicate enough about symptoms; adolescents may be reluctant to disclose use of psychiatric drugs. There is
no mandatory laboratory test or diagnostic method in diagnosis of SS. Diagnosis is mainly based on clinical history and physical findings.
In our case, both clinical history and physical examination supported the diagnosis of SS. In the literature, there are three different
diagnostic criteria systems for the diagnosis of SS published by Sternbach,12) Radomski et al.13) and Hunter.14) The present case meets
overall diagnostic criteria defined by three researchers. The highest risk for the development of SS is using monoaminoxidase inhibitors,
which suppress serotonin metabolism, together with these drugs.15) Herein, we report a 12-year-old girl with SS, which developed during
concurrent irregular use of risperidone and clomipramine. Clomipramine, which is a member of tricyclic antidepressant group, is a
noradrenalin and serotonin reuptake inhibitor. Risperidone is one of the atypical antipsychotics and the antagonist of dopamine D2,
serotonin 5HT2A and 5HT2C receptors. It is used in patients with behavioral disorder which is usually administrated in doses ranging from 1
to 4 mg/day.16,17) The interaction of these drugs may be facilitated SS in the present case which 2D6 isoenzyme might have been overloaded
producing thus a state of serotonin toxicity. More specifically, co-administration of risperidone might have enhanced the plasma
concentration of clomipramine.17) There are limited numbers of pediatric case reports in the literature. Some of these include three cases
due to sertraline use,3–5) a case due to fluvoxamine use6) and a case due to fluoxetine use,7) which are antidepressant agents. Grenha et
al.8) defined SS due to concurrent use of sertraline and risperidone in a pediatric case. However, There is no SS case report due to
concurrent use of risperidone and clomipramine in literature. In the treatment of SS, first all of serotonergic drugs must be discontinued
and supportive treatment should be started. Most of the patients improve within 24 hours following discontinuation of serotonergic drug.11)
Benzodiazepine, cyproheptadine and chlorpromazine are the drugs most commonly used in the treatment of SS. Benzodiazepines are used for
muscle rigidity, seizure-like movement disorders and agitations of the patients.18) The symptoms of the present case, which was monitored in
intensive care unit, regressed with fluid replacement and benzodiazepine within 24 hours as described in literature. In conclusion, SS is a
rare condition with high mortality. It should be diagnosed promptly and requires serious monitoring. In the present case, concurrent use of
risperidone and high-dose clomipramine use caused SS. To our knowledge, this case is the first reported SS case due to concurrent
clomipramine and risperidone use in literature. It is important to warn the parents of children that are using these drugs in terms of dose
and symptoms. In addition, SS should be kept in mind for adolescents receiving antidepressant therapy, as they usually attempt suicide with
their drugs. We also presented the case to emphasize that detailed anamnesis and physical examination, which could save the patient’s life.
