Authors’ Contribution: Study Design Data Collection Statistical Analysis Data Interpretation Manuscript Preparation Literature Search Funds
Collection Conflict of interest: None declared Patient: Female, 56 Final Diagnosis: Birt-Hogg-Dubé syndrome Symptoms: Dyspnea Medication: —
Clinical Procedure: — Specialty: Pulmonology Rare disease Birt-Hogg-Dubé (BHD) syndrome is an autosomal dominant disorder clinically
characterized by pulmonary cysts, spontaneous pneumothorax, renal cell cancer, and skin fibrofolliculomas. The disorder is caused by
germline mutations in the FLCN gene. A 56-year-old female was admitted to our hospital with a diagnosis of bilateral spontaneous
pneumothorax. A computed tomography (CT) scan of the chest revealed bilateral multiple bullae predominantly located in the subpleural and
mediastinal areas in the bilateral upper and lower lobes. Although she was cured by thoracic cavity drainage, she underwent resection of
bilateral lung bullae because she had a prior history of right pneumothorax at 37- and 45-years of age. She had no signs of renal tumor but
had fibrofolliculoma in her face and a family history of pneumothorax, we therefore suspected BHD syndrome. DNA sequence analyses determined
that there was a two base pair deletion in exon 4 of the FLCN gene, confirming the diagnosis of BHD syndrome. Here we report a case of BHD
syndrome with a previously unreported FLCN mutation. Birt-Hogg-Dubé (BHD) syndrome is a rare autosomal dominant disease originally reported
in 1977 . The syndrome is characterized by lung cysts, spontaneous pneumothorax, renal cell cancer, and skin fibrofolliculomas . Some
patients also may suffer from colorectal polyps and other cancers . The gene responsible for BHD syndrome has been mapped on chromosome
17p11.2 and encodes FLCN, which is currently regarded as a tumor suppressor gene . Since the first discovery of a mutation in the FLCN gene,
genetic research has further advanced and various different FLCN germline mutations have been identified in Caucasian and Asian families .
Recently, we encountered a Japanese family with a lineage of BHD syndrome and documented histories of pneumothorax in family members.
Genetic analysis of one of the family members and a computed tomographic (CT) scan of the chest were performed. Here we report the finding
of a patient with BHD syndrome in which mutation analysis subsequently revealed a novel mutation in exon 4 of the FLCN gene. A 56-year-old
female non-smoker presented with a sudden onset of dyspnea. Clinical examination and chest X-ray confirmed bilateral pneumothorax (Figure
1A). An intercostal drain was inserted in the left side with complete resolution. Right pneumothorax was reversed without thoracic cavity
drainage. She had a past history of right pneumothorax occurring at the ages of 37 years and 45 years. A computed tomography (CT) scan
revealed bilateral multiple bullae predominantly located in the subpleural areas in the bilateral lower lobes (Figure 1B), however, no
tomographic finding was observed in the abdomen. Physical examination revealed multiple smooth dome shaped skin-colored papules ranging from
0.5 to several mm in diameter spanning the nose and cheek; however, the skin manifestation was inconspicuous and she had not consulted a
dermatologist. A detailed history suggested that there was no known inherited or connective tissue disease among the extended family;
however, other members of her family, including her mother, younger brother, and her elder, second, and third sons had also suffered
spontaneous pneumothorax and undergone surgery (Figure 2). The patient underwent bilateral sequential bulletectomy by video-assisted
thoracoscopic surgery (Figure 3). Unfortunately, left spontaneous pneumothorax recurred 5 weeks and 8 weeks after the surgery; for which she
was treated with thoracic cavity drainage with pleurodesis and cured. The resected lung specimen showed multiple cysts distributed
predominantly in subpleural and mediastinal space, and the air leakage site was not clear. The specimen did not show characteristic findings
of lymphangioleiomyomatosis (LAM) and Sjogren’s syndrome, which are pre-disposing factors of pneumothorax in women with multiple lung cysts.
Molecular analysis of the FLCN gene was performed after informed consent from the patient and the family. Genomic DNA was extracted from
peripheral blood leukocytes and subjected to mutation analysis. The coding region of the FLCN gene consisting of exon 4 to 14 was amplified
with polymerase chain reaction (PCR) with oligonucleotide primers and was sequenced by the Sanger method. The sequence analysis revealed a
novel deletion mutation (c.57_58delCT) in exon 4 of the FLCN gene of this patient (Figure 4) . Nickerson et al. determined in 2002 that the
gene responsible for BHD syndrome lies within chromosomal band 17p11.2 and termed this gene BHD . At present, the official symbol for this
gene is FLCN. The gene encodes a deduced 579-amino acid protein, which is involved in cell growth and is considered to be a tumor suppressor
in the kidney . It has been reported that there are various kinds of germline FLCN mutations in Caucasian and Asian patients with BHD
syndrome. The FLCN gene is composed of 14 exons and mutations have been identified in all translated exons. Notably, C insertion or deletion
in exon 11 is frequently detected in affected patients In this report, we described a novel mutation found in exon 4. Until now at least
nine FLCN germline mutations have been identified in exon 4. Painter et al. reported a 4-bp deletion in the first coding exon
(c.235_238delTCGG) predicted to result in a TGA termination codon 50 missense amino acids downstream. This mutation was found in a large
Finnish family with a dominantly inherited tendency for primary pneumothorax . Bessis et al. reported a case with sporadic BHD syndrome
harboring a novel germline mutation in the initiation codon of the FLCN gene (c.3delG) . The patient had no lung cysts, no renal tumors, and
no colon polyps but developed fibrofolliculomas. Although the proband’s son suffered a spontaneous pneumothorax at the age of 4, the
patient’s family history was inconspicuous. The other exon 4 mutation (c.59delT) reported by Schmidt et al. was predicted to truncate the
protein 34 missense amino acids downstream. Families that had this type of mutation developed fibrofolliculomas without other types of
features . In addition to these mutations, Toro et al. have also reported other types of mutations (c.147delA) . In our case study, genetic
analysis revealed a unique deletion mutation (c.57_58delCT) in exon 4 that has not been previously described. It has been reported that more
than 80% of patients with BHD syndrome have lung cysts as determined by CT scans of the chest . Pulmonary cysts (of primary spontaneous
pneumothorax) are typically located in the apex of the lungs, however, the lung cysts in BHD syndrome are mostly found in the basilar region
of the lung . Moreover, the characteristic pathological findings of the lung cysts in BHD syndrome are radiologically round and contain
blood vessels . We confirmed these findings in the case of our patient. In addition to the fact that she was a non-smoker, clinical episodes
and radiographic and histopathological findings eliminated the possibility of our patient having pulmonary Langerhans’ cell histiocytosis
(PLCH), lymphangioleiomyomatosis (LAM), tuberous sclerosis complex (TSC), lymphoid interstitial pneumonia (LIP), and Sjogren’s syndrome,
which can also be causes of multiple lung cysts . Although genetic analysis was performed only on this patient, we are planning to perform
genetic analysis of family members of the patient. We consider annual screening for renal tumor to also be important for the patient and her
family, so abdominal ultrasonography and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the abdomen should be performed. We have explained to the
patient and family that air travel carries a risk of pneumothorax in patients with BHD syndrome . Currently, there are few effective
therapies for BHD syndrome of the lung; however, pleural covering combined with resection of cysts is expected to be a safe and effective
therapy for BHD patients with intractable pneumothorax . Based on our observations, one should consider the possibility of BHD syndrome in
patients with multiple lung cysts that present with discriminative findings on a CT scan of the lungs, as well as patients with familial
pneumothorax. Patients suspected of BHD syndrome should be offered molecular analysis, which will not only verify the diagnosis but also
inform recommendations for presymptomatic testing of at-risk family members . The authors thank M. Durbin (University of California, Irvine)
for discussions. Conflict of interest None of the authors has any conflict of interest directly relevant to the content of this article. (A)
Chest X-ray showing bilateral pneumothorax. Arrowheads indicate vanishing lungs. (B) Chest computed tomography scan from a case of BHD
syndrome demonstrating multiple bilateral thin-walled cysts, predominantly distributed in the basilar regions of the lung. Arrows indicate
lung cysts. Simplified pedigree of the patient’s family with spontaneous pneumothorax. Arrow indicates the proband (P). Video-assisted
thoracoscopic bullectomy was performed in individuals 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, and 6. The ages of the patients who developed pneumothoraxes are shown.
Thoracoscopic view shows the lung cyst in the right lower lobe. The sequence analysis showed a deletion mutation (c.57_58delCT) in exon 4 of
the FLCN gene. The novel deletion mutation (c.57_58delCT) caused a frame shift and changed the 20th amino acid: phenylalanine to leucine and
the 16th reading frame from the leucine change to a premature stop codon (p.Phe20LeufsX16).
