Atlantoaxial instability treated with the C1-2 transarticular screw fixation is biomechanically more stable; however, the technique
demanding and the potential risk of neurovascular injury create difficulties for clinical usage, and there is still lack of clinical
experience till now. We reported an adult female patient with symptomatic atlantoaxial instability due to rheumatoid arthritis that was
successfully treated with a bilateral C1–C2 transarticular screw fixation using a customized guiding block. We preoperatively determined the
trajectories for bilateral C1–C2 transarticular screws on a 3-dimensional reconstruction model from the computed tomography (CT) and self-
developed computer software, and designed a rapid prototyping customized guiding block in order to offer a guide for the entry point and
insertion angle of the C1–C2 transarticular screws. The clinical outcome was good, and the follow-up period was >3 years. The accuracy of
the screws is good in comparison with preoperative and postoperative CT findings, and no neurovascular injury occurred. The patient was
accurately and successfully treated with a bilateral C1–C2 transarticular screw fixation using a customized guiding block. The atlantoaxial
segments (C1–C2) of cervical vertebrae connect the skull to the cervical spine and are easily fractured or injured by trauma. Fractured
C1–C2 segments are stabilized by 2 common methods, the direct anterior screw fixation, and the posterior fusion of C1–C2. Jeanneret B and
Magerl F noted a preference for C1–C2 transarticular screw fixation using the posterior fusion technique because it provides increased
stability and allows immediate ambulation with minimal head support. In patients with rheumatoid arthritis (RA), atlantoaxial subluxation
(AAS) is the most common cervical instability, resulting from trauma, inflammatory disease, tumor, infection, and congenital or acquired
abnormalities.[3 4] The clinical symptoms and signs of AAS include pain, stiffness, pyramidal tract involvement, vertebrobasilar
insufficiency, and radiculopathy. In 1951, Davis and Markley reported medullary compression as a cause of death in patients with rheumatoid
arthritis. Mortality is a significant threat if AAS with cervical myelopathy is left untreated. When a patient has neurological impairment,
instability, and pain, posterior C1–C2 fusion is indicated. The transarticular screw fusion technique proposed by Magerl and Seemann in 1979
provides immediate postoperative stability and high fusion rate (>90%) compared with traditional wiring and grafting methods.[4 6–8] The
inserted screw facilitates the fusion of adjacent vertebrae. However, this technique is considered dangerous and a technically difficult
procedure that requires significant surgical skill and experience to avoid injuring nerves and vessels while providing no measurable
improvement in results compared with conventional wiring techniques. The main risk of this method is vertebral artery injury (3%) secondary
to screw malposition (7%). Vertebral artery injury usually occurs at the C2 level and may be fatal. To this point, Grob et al reviewed 161
patients receiving 322 C1–C2 transarticular screw fixation, and reported that 25 (7.7%) screws were too far lateral, 7(2.1%) were too far
medial, 11 screws (3.4%) were too short, screws inserted at wrong angles, and some did not cross the C1–C2 joint. Further, 6 (1.8%) were too
long, protruded through the lateral mass of the atlas ventrally. However, complications occurred in only 4 patients with associated
malpositioned screws. Only 5.9% of the complications were directly related to the screws, including 3 patients with loose or displaced
screws, and 3 other patients with broken screws at follow-up. Only 1 patient developed a unilateral paresis of the hypoglosseal nerve, and 1
patient with pseudarthrosis (0.6%). No injury to the vertebral artery or spinal cord or dura mater was found. Although the rate of
complication of this technique is low, no one wants to be the complication case. To minimize the rate of fatal complications, intraoperative
fluoroscopy and CT-based computer navigation systems are used to achieve safe and accurate instrumentation in fusion surgery for AAS cases.
In our previous study,[11 12] we developed customized guiding blocks and accurately inserted transpedicular screws in thoracic and lumbar
vertebral segments in difficult cases, such as those with scoliosis. The accuracy and reliability of transpedicular screw placement using a
guiding block has been verified by computed tomography (CT). We showed the average angle of deviation from the planned trajectory was
1.05°±1.05°. The average distance difference from the planned entry point was 2.99 ± 0.39 mm. Hu and his colleagues also developed a novel
rapid prototyping drill template and reported a C1–C2 transarticular screw placement assisted by this template (C1C2TAS) in a cadaveric
study. They reported that no significant difference in the entry point and direction between the intended and actual screw trajectory. Based
on the previous accuracy and reliability of guiding-block-directed screw insertion achieved in thoracic and lumbar spine,[11 12] we
challenged ourselves with bilateral C1–C2 transarticular screw placement for fixation of atlantoaxial subluxation using a customized guiding
block. The preoperative workflow for the guiding block (template) design is depicted in Fig. 1. The patient's cervical lesion region was
scanned by computer tomography at 1.0 mm per slice. We developed an image processing software to decode the DICOM (Digital Imaging and
Communications in Medicine) imaging into a personal computer. The marching cube algorithm was applied to reconstruct the cervical model in
3D from a series of CT images. We defined left and right screw trajectories by locating the entry point and potential end point on the
cervical model via our developed path planning software. We then determined the desired trajectories of screw insertion in the program's
visual environment displaying the patient's 3D reconstruction model of the cervical spine. The platform of the guiding block was designed to
cover the surface of the C2 vertebra in a specified position, and the remaining components of the guiding block (jig, sleeves, and holder)
can then be designed and added to the platform. Finally, the customized guiding block was manufactured using rapid prototyping. Workflow of
guiding templates design and the guiding template. Our design was a compromise between diverse requests (both small and stable) and complied
with the above described principles. To achieve accurate intraoperative localization of the guiding block on the C2 vertebra, the platform
of the customized guiding block was designed to rest closely on the laminar surfaces of C2. As shown in Fig. 1, the platform connected with
a hook-shape slip stoppers of the guiding block ensuring stability during intraoperative drilling. Based on the planned trajectories, the
sleeves could be merged with the platforms and the holder in a correct orientation. The inner diameter of the sleeves is slightly larger
than the guide pin to allow smooth passage. The sleeves were offset a short distance above the lamina to facilitate intraoperative
observation of the entry point. The holder is made crossing over the spinous process where informational text clearly identifies and can be
held in place just above the vertebra. This 51-year-old female was healthy until 1 year prior to this study when she started complaining of
neck pain and stiffness with occipital radiation. She had no trauma history, no upper limb discomfort, and no limitation of neck flexion or
extension. The motor function and deep tendon reflex of upper and lower limbs were normal. The cervical lateral radiograph revealed C1–C2
subluxation (Fig. 2A). The atlantoaxial distance increased during flexion, which signified atlantoaxial instability. Magnetic resonance
imaging (MRI) showed irregularity of bilateral C1–C2 joints and soft tissue signal between the anterior arch of the atlas and odontoid
process of the axis - hypointense signal on T1-weighted image and hyperintense signal on T2-weighted image. Early rheumatoid arthritis with
pannus formation was suspected. The discomfort did not improve after a 1-year course of medication and rehabilitation program. Due to
conservative treatment failure, surgical intervention was recommended and accepted by the patient. She volunteered to attend the clinical
trial. (A) The atlantoaxial subluxation with increased atlantoaxial distance was demonstrated in flexion position of lateral radiograph of
cervical spine. (B) Intraoperative fluoroscopic examination of upper cervical spine after completion of insertion of 2 C1–C2 transarticular
screws. (C) Three years postoperatively, the atlantoaxial alignment was good without loss of reduction. Reduction of C1–C2 subluxation was
achieved by postural adjustment and traction, and confirmed with fluoroscopy before draping. After posterior midline incision, the lamina of
C2-3, the posterior arch of the atlas, and the lower occiput were explored. The laminar surface of C2 and its edge were electrocauterized
meticulously to eliminate most of soft tissue attachment to minimize localization error when the guiding block was applied. We identified
the C2 entry site, which was located 3-mm rostral and 3-mm lateral to the inferior medial facet joint of C2-3. After opening the cortex with
a burr at the estimated entry point on C2 near C2-3 articular surface, the guiding block was placed on the laminar surface and its
connective inferior edge of the vertebra. Before the C-2 transarticular screw insertion procedure, we examined the fluoroscopic imaging to
confirm the K-wire trajectory (Fig. 2B). We ensured well-fitted contact between the platform and the laminar surface by precise locating the
guiding block and a firm pressure applied onto the holder of the guiding block against the C2 lamina before advancing 2 Kirschner wires
(K-wires) (1.2 mm in diameter) through bilateral sleeves of the guiding block and pre-burred entry point to a proper depth (Fig. 3). We
checked the orientation and depth of the K-wires by anteroposterior and lateral fluoroscopy to prevent trivial deviation of the guiding
block (Fig. 2B). The K-wire trajectory needed to cross the C1–C2 facet joint and was aimed at the anterior tubercle of the atlas in lateral
view of fluoroscopy, and was directed approximately 15 degrees medially in antero-posterior view of fluoroscopy. Intraoperatively, we
applied the customized guiding block on the C2 lamina surface with a well-fitted contact, and then advanced 2 Kirschner wires through
bilateral sleeves of the guiding block before insertion of bilateral C1–C2 transarticular screws to ensure the accuracy of the screw
trajectory. With the use of the customized guiding block and fluoroscopic guidance, if the guiding block is moved upward or laterally
slightly, it is possible to identify the mismatch and adjust accordingly, even to steady stand and hook on the lamina surface and inferior
edge. We did not remove the C2/C3 interspinal ligaments. The tract was tapped using a cannulated tap device after removing the guiding
block. After removing the K-wires, the transarticular screw was applied carefully, strictly abiding by the trajectory created. The
orientation and the depth of the screw were checked fluoroscopically at final insertion (Fig. 2B). Posterior instrumented fusion of C1–C2
with bilateral transarticular screws guided by the customized template was accomplished after posterolateral fusion with the autogenous
iliac bone graft between C1–C2. No vertebral artery injury was found intraoperatively. The patient's symptoms of neck pain, stiffness, and
occipital radiation were completely and immediately resolved. A neck collar was worn for 3 months. At the 3-month follow-up, she had no neck
pain or occiput radiation pain and returned to her normal activities. Three years postoperatively, there were no symptoms or neurological
deficit, and the atlantoaxial alignment was good without loss of reduction (Fig. 2C). For validation, the model of cervical vertebrae was
reconstructed from postoperative CT scan data. The iterative closest points algorithm (ICP) was employed to fuse the preoperative and
postoperative vertebral models reconstructed by different scanning data. This method iteratively transforms the spatial coordinates from 1
vertebra to the other until both models overlap completely. Three-dimensional (3D) deviation distance between 2 entry points and 3D
deviation angle between the planned trajectory and transarticular screws can be calculated. Two-dimensional deviation angle and distance
between 2 entry points on the coronal plane and sagittal plane (a commonly used estimation of difference in clinics) were defined and
calculated. Table 1 shows the deviation from planned trajectories of bilateral transarticular screws was small. The absolute angle deviation
was less than 3 degrees and the distance difference of 2 entry points was <1.5 mm. The deviation of 2 transarticular screws from their
planned trajectories in 3D space was calculated (Table 2). The angle deviation was 3 to 4 degrees and distance deviation between 2 entry
points was <2 mm in 3D space. The angle deviation and distance deviation of the entry points of transarticular screws. Comparison of the
preoperative planning and postoperative outcomes in 3D space. The transarticular screw fusion technique proposed by Magerl and Seemann in
1979 provides immediate postoperative stability and higher fusion rate (>90%) compared with traditional wiring and grafting methods.[4 6–8]
The technique has been used for atlantoaxial instability, with impressive outcomes reported by Dickman and Sonntag and Haid et al with 96%
and 98% osseous fusion rates, respectively, and with a low incidence of complications. Haid et al suggested that their successful outcome
was attributed to the careful preoperative anatomic structure relationship study, skilled surgical techniques to expose the critical
landmarks intraoperatively and good image guidance. The choice of screw entry point might still be a difficult issue. However, this problem
can be solved with the customized guiding block. The customized surgical guide was developed in the early 1990s by Prof. Klaus Radermacher
and has been applied clinically for preoperative 3-dimensional planning and precise surgeries in spine, hip, knee, and pelvic repositioning
osteotomies in acetabular dysplasia therapy using individual templates based on the computerized tomographic images. We also used the
customized guiding block to direct the insertion of transpedicular screws to thoracic and lumbar spine in difficult clinical cases, and had
good clinical results.[11 12] Hu et al also developed a similar drill template and displayed accuracy in placement of a C1–C2 transarticular
screw in a cadaveric study. Small deviations do occur due to technical or human factors, often from incomplete removal of the soft tissue or
image software used to design the template. In the current study, we broadened the use of this system to the upper cervical spine for
atlantoaxial subluxation in a patient with early rheumatoid arthritis. We validated the screw tracts by comparison to planned trajectories
on 3D models derived from CT reconstruction. Our results show accuracy of both entry point and insertion angle of bilateral transarticular
screws for atlantoaxial fixation, and the clinical result showed immediate postoperative relief, lasting for >3 years. Our data show a small
angle deviation and distance difference of the entry points calculated by comparing planned trajectory and postoperative screw tracts in 2D
projections and 3D models reconstructed from CT data. The incidence of screw misposition was reported between 2% and 15% and vertebral
artery injury in 2.5%.[9 18 19] Although the incidence of vertebral artery injury was not high, the consequence is critical. Apfelbaum
reported bilateral vertebral artery injuries leading to death in a series of 40 patients. High accuracy achieved by guiding block-directed
insertion of the screws greatly improves the safety of transarticular atlantoaxial fixation. Paramore et al reported that 18% of the
patients had a high-riding transverse foramen at least on one side of the C2 vertebra, which would prohibit ideal trajectory of screw
placement. In our system, the surgeon determined the planned trajectory in a 3D model reconstructed from preoperative CT and likely
circumvented the potential hazard of injuring anomalous vertebral artery by working out a safe trajectory. These findings show our system
saves time and reduces radiation exposure. Traditionally, the transarticular screw insertion for C1–C2 is directed by repeat intraoperative
fluoroscopy in 2 planes. With our method, fluoroscopy is needed only once, theoretically, after insertion of Kirschner wires. Compared with
CT-based computer navigation system, our device does not need intraoperative registration. Further, inexperienced surgeons find our system
user friendly, which has a shorter learning curve compared with tradition techniques. Finally, our device is custom-made by 3D printing,
which reduces cost significantly compared with expensive O-arm and computer navigation systems. The human factors of patient uniqueness had
considerable influence in our study. The angle deviation was larger compared to the average angle deviation in thoracic and lumbar spine.
Inadequate soft tissue clearance and narrower platform of the guiding block for smaller C2 laminar surface were 2 potential causes of angle
deviation. Other errors included the accuracy of the computer tomography (Siemens Somatom Sensation 16 CT scanner, with slice thickness of
0.7 mm and display field of view of 166 mm in a 512 × 512 pixel image), model reconstruction from the CT scan (all reconstructed models were
calculated in sub-pixel to reduce the errors arising from image threshold selection, and the errors generated from the modeling method were
negligible), and ICP registration (average error below 0.1 mm). Another potential source of deviation came from inserting the screw without
direct guide of Kirschner wire, and adoption to cannulated screws would ameliorate such deviation. More cases are needed to thoroughly
establish the reliability of our customized guiding block system in C1–C2 transarticular -assisted fusion scenario. In this case, we
successfully extended the technique to the most critical and skill-demanding spinal segments of C1–C2 in an adult female patient with
symptomatic atlantoaxial instability due to rheumatoid arthritis using a customized guiding block. The customized guiding block for C1–C2
transarticular screw insertion is clinically feasible and may provide advantages of accuracy, safety, reliability, time-saving, radiation-
saving, and economically more efficient. Spine surgeon would benefit greatly from our system especially in difficult cases, such as those
with vertebral artery anomaly, by planning a safe trajectory preoperatively. In addition, the learning curve for spine surgeons will be
shortened, requiring less time and resources for training. The operator must clear laminar surface thoroughly and match the platform of the
guiding block perfectly on the bare target bone surface to minimize angle deviation and distance difference of the entry points.
Abbreviations: 3D = three-dimensional, AAS = atlantoaxial subluxation, CT = computed tomography, RA = rheumatoid arthritis. Funding: The
study was sponsored by Ministry of Science and Technology, Taiwan, granted number NSC 98-2314-B-006-013-MY3. The clinical trial was approved
by IRB committee (HR-97-123) in National Cheng Kung University Hospital. The authors have no conflicts of interest to disclose.
