Correspondence to Dr.　Hitoshi Kohsaka, kohsaka.rheu@tmd.ac.jp A 36-year-old woman developed hypokalemic metabolic alkalosis after anti SS-A
antibody was found to be positive. Diuretic loading test results were compatible with Gitelman syndrome (GS). The patient had a heterozygous
mutation in SLC12A3, which encodes for thiazide-sensitive NaCl cotransporter (NCCT). While the mutation may be responsible for a latent
hypofunction of NCCTs, the underlying anti-SSA antibody-associated autoimmunity induced the manifestation of its hypofunction. To the best
of our knowledge, this is the first report to demonstrate that anti SS-A antibody-associated autoimmunity may induce GS in a patient with a
SLC12A3 heterozygous mutation. Gitelman syndrome (GS) is an autosomal recessive disease attributed to a mutation in the SLC12A3 gene, which
encodes for thiazide-sensitive NaCl cotransporter (NCCT) in the distal renal tubules. The clinical findings of GS are characterized by
hypokalemic alkalosis, hypomagnesaemia, hypocalciuria, lower blood pressure, which are attributed to impairment of NCCTs. GS develops with a
homozygous mutation or compound heterozygosity in SLC12A3. However, 40% of patients with clinically diagnosed GS have no mutation or a
heterozygous mutation in SLC12A3 (1). Fava et al. reported that those with a heterozygous mutation in SLC12A3 had significantly lower blood
pressure than those without mutations and suggested that the NCCT function is partially impaired in those with a heterozygous mutation (2).
Acquired GS is rare and only six cases have been reported (3-8), four of which were associated with Sjögren's syndrome (SS) (3-6). One case
was associated with chronic sialadenitis (7). Therefore, SS may contribute to the development of GS. SS is a systemic autoimmune disease
characterized by lacrimal and salivary gland hyposecretion. It is often accompanied by increased circulating polyclonal immunoglobulins and
autoantibodies, and extraglandular complications such as interstitial nephritis, interstitial pneumonia and arthritis are relatively common.
The case presented herein had a heterozygous mutation in SLC12A3 and developed GS after anti-SSA antibody was found to be positive. We
suspected that our case had an underlying autoimmune response associated with SS, because she also had bilateral parotid swelling,
xerostomia with the findings of low grade periductal lymphoid cell infiltration in the salivary gland biopsy and tubulointerstitial
inflammation in the renal biopsy. A 36-year-old woman was admitted for muscle cramps, fatigue and a loss of appetite. Four years prior to
this admission, subclinical hypokalemia (3.1 mEq/L) and hypochloremia (96 mEq/L) were noted. Serum electrolytes could not be maintained at
normal levels without taking potassium supplements. Six months prior to this admission, the patient stopped taking potassium supplements,
resulting in muscle cramps in her extremities. One week prior to admission, she developed fatigue and a loss of appetite. The patient had
been healthy except for elevated liver enzyme levels attributed to her excessive alcohol intake. She did not have osteomalacia. Five years
prior to the admission, bilateral parotid swelling developed. Testing for SS-A antibody was positive. Schirmer's test, the Saxon text, and
chewing gum test were within normal ranges. A salivary gland biopsy revealed two focuses of periductal lymphoid cell infiltration in 24 mm2.
However, this finding did not fulfill the diagnostic criterion requiring one or more focuses of periductal lymphoid cell infiltration in 4
mm2. Dry mouth and dry eye subsequently developed. Although the diagnostic criteria of SS were not completely fulfilled, we presumed that
she had an underlying autoimmune response associated with SS. The serum IgG4 level was within the normal range (19.2 mg/dL). No organ
enlargement except for parotid glands was revealed with a computed tomography (CT) scan. Taken together, we concluded that IgG4-related
disease was unlikely, although immunostaining for anti-IgG4 antibodies was not conducted in the salivary glands. At the time of the
development of bilateral parotid swelling, the blood pressure was 106/61 mmHg, and serum levels of potassium (4.9 mEq/L), chloride (109
mEq/L), magnesium (2.3 mEq/L) and creatinine (0.61 mg/dL) were within normal ranges. Regular medical checkups prior to the SS-like
autoimmunity development did not reveal any electrolyte abnormalities. It has been well known that interstitial nephritis complicates SS.
Although the extent of proteinuria was mild (0.3 g/day), a renal biopsy was performed to clarify the renal involvement. A renal biopsy
revealed a small amount of monocyte infiltration around atrophic renal tubules in a localized area (Fig. 1). Concurrently, myelodysplastic
syndrome (MDS) was diagnosed because of the increased number of ringed sideroblasts observed by bone marrow aspiration. However, no
hematological abnormality was observed in the peripheral blood cells. Fifty glomeruli were obtained. One of the glomeruli was sclerosed.
Around the sclerosed glomerulus, renal tubular atrophy and interstitial fibrosis were noted. There was focal inflammatory cell
infiltration.There was no sign of glomerulonephritis. On admission, she was normotensive (95/64 mmHg). A physical examination revealed
muscle weakness, dry eyes and mouth and bilateral parotid swelling, and most of her teeth had caries. A laboratory examination revealed
hypokalemia (2.7 mEq/L), hypochloremia (70 mEq/L), and elevated creatinine (2.46 mg/dL). The plasma renin activity (PRA; 2.6 ng/mL/h),
plasma aldosterone concentration (PAC; 112 pg/mL) and PAC/PRA ratio (43) were all within normal ranges. An arterial gas analysis revealed
metabolic alkalosis (pH, 7.549; PaCO2, 66.7 mmHg; HCO3-, 56.9 mmol/L). A urine analysis revealed that the urinary pH was 8.5. Both red and
white cells were not found in the urine. Urinary protein was 3+, and the protein/creatinine ratio was 0.30 g/gCr. Urinary glucose was
negative. N-acetyl-beta-D-glucosaminidase (NAG) was 12.1 IU/g・Cr, and β2-microglobulin was 48,254 μg/g・Cr. A high urinary chloride
concentration (27.2 mEq/g・Cr) and low calcium concentration (0.2 mEq/day) were also detected. An electrocardiogram revealed a prolonged QT
interval. A chest X-ray revealed no abnormal findings. Despite hypochloremia, urinary chloride excretion was increased. The transtubular
potassium gradient was increased to 4.53, indicating that hypokalemia was due to renal potassium wasting. Primary aldosteronism was unlikely
because of the normal PAC/PRA ratio. She had no history of recurrent vomiting, diarrhea, or taking diuretics. After potassium and saline
infusion, the clinical symptoms disappeared. The serum levels of creatinine, potassium and urinary levels of NAG and the QT interval were
all normalized. Urinary β2-microglobulin decreased to an almost normal level. GS was suspected because of the findings of relatively low
blood pressure, metabolic alkalosis, hypochloremia, and low urinary calcium excretion, although the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system was
normal. Diuretic loading test was conducted to evaluate the activity of NCCTs and furosemide-sensitive Na-K-Cl cotransporters (NKCCs) (Table
1). Furosemide infusion significantly increased the fractional excretion (FE) of sodium (FENa) and chloride (FECl). On the other hand,
thiazide infusion increased FENa and FECl to a lesser extent. This indicated a hypofuction of NCCTs and hyperfunction of NKCCs as
compensation for the NCCT hypofunction, which was compatible with GS. Diuretic Loading Test. Thiazide loading test Furosemide loading test
Our protocol followed the protocol employed by Colussi et al (11). They conducted the diuretic loading test to clinically diagnosed patients
with GS and healthy controls. The differences between Colussi’s protocol and ours were as follows. In Colussi’s protocol, potassium
supplement is discontinued. The furosemide and thiazide loading tests are performed at least 7 days apart. In our case, potassium supplement
was continued. The furosemide and thiazide loading tests were performed on consecutive days. The results of the report by Colussi et al. and
our case are shown in the Table. ΔFE is the difference between the highest FE after furosemide or thiazide infusion and the mean of the two
FE before infusion. After discharge, the patient continued taking potassium supplements. The serum potassium level normalized, whereas
metabolic alkalosis, hypochloremia, and increased urinary chloride excretion persisted. As GS was suspected, a genetic analysis of all exon
regions of SLC12A3 using the Sanger sequencing method was conducted. A heterozygous mutation in c.C3052T (p.R1018X) (Fig. 2) was detected,
which changes the 1,018th arginine to a stop codon and truncates the C terminal of NCCTs. However, no additional mutation was detected in
the exon regions. Sanger sequencing of all exon regions of SLC12A3 revealed a heterozygous mutation in c.C3052T, which changes the codon of
the 1,018th arginine to a stop codon. No additional mutation was found. We found six cases of acquired GS in the previous literature. Among
them, two cases (4,5) underwent a genetic analysis but no mutations in SLC12A3 were found. The heterozygous mutation in SLC12A3 could be
responsible for the latent hypofunction of NCCTs. Acid-base imbalance or electrolyte abnormalities were absent before the present patient
was found to have an underlying autoimmune response associated with SS. Therefore, we presumed that anti-SSA antibody-associated
autoimmunity may have exacerbated the hypofunction of NCCTs, resulting in the development of GS. The mutation in our case, at the 1,018th
arginine in SLC12A3, resulted in the elimination of the C terminal in the NCCT. Berry et al. reported that a patient with a compound
heterozygous mutation at the same location developed GS (9), indicating that the truncated NCCTs derived from the mutant allele have an
impaired function. No additional mutation was detected in the exon regions. However, the possibility of SLC12A3 compound heterozygosity was
not excluded thoroughly in our case, because GS could have developed as a result of mutations in the intronic regions (10). Several reports
have suggested a latent hypofunction of NCCTs induced by heterozygous mutations and the existence of compensation mechanisms (11,12).
Colussi et al. reported that furosemide induced a higher FENa and FECl in patients with GS than in controls, indicating that the
compensative increase of NaCl reabsorption might have occurred in NKCCs (11). Cruz et al. suggested that patients with heterozygous
mutations have a higher salt intake and higher urinary sodium excretion than controls (12). In the present case, an increased response to
the furosemide administration was observed. This might reflect the compensative hyperfunction of NKCC. Hypokalemia was not noted before SS
was suspected, and no change in dietary habit was observed before the development of GS. In addition to the incomplete function due to the
heterozygous mutation in SLC12A3, anti-SSA antibody-associated autoimmunity may have abrogated the compensatory mechanism, resulting in the
development of GS. Among the six cases of acquired GS, four of them were associated with SS (3-6), and one of them was associated with
chronic sialadenitis (7) (Table 2). The other case was a kidney recipient from a donor with GS (8). SS is a single comorbidity reported to
be associated with acquired GS, suggesting that anti-SSA antibody-associated autoimmunity may have played a role in the development of GS.
Acquired GS Cases. The link between the autoimmune response and NCCT hypofunction remains unclear. Kim et al. suggested the presence of
anti-NCCT antibody in the patient's serum. They reported a patient with interstitial nephritis associated with SS who later developed GS
(3). The patient underwent immunosuppressive therapy, and electrolyte abnormality and proteinuria disappeared. An immunohistochemical study
of the distal convoluted tubules demonstrated the absence of the NCCT expression, indicating that an autoantibody against NCCT might have
existed in the serum of the patient. Immunosuppressive therapy may have normalized the electrolyte abnormality in a similar manner to the
case reported by Kim et al. (3). However, this therapy was not conducted in the present study because there were no findings of active
tubulointerstitial nephritis, and our case was managed with potassium supplements alone. We searched for renal complications of MDS and
found only several cases of glomerulonephritis with MDS. Moreover, there have been no reports of renal tubular diseases associated with MDS.
Therefore, we concluded that the development of GS was not associated with MDS. This is the first report to demonstrate that anti-SSA
antibody-associated autoimmunity may contribute to the development of GS in a patient with a SLC12A3 heterozygous mutation. We thank Dr.
Kiyotaka Nagahama for offering the kidney biopsy results and for providing valuable advice.
