Correspondence to Dr.　Yasuhiko Nishioka, yasuhiko@tokushima-u.ac.jp A 61-year-old man had hypertension with stenosis in the left renal
artery. When his fever, abdominal pain, and renal dysfunction progressed, he was admitted to our hospital. He was diagnosed with
polyarthritis nodosa. His renal function rapidly deteriorated despite immunosuppressive therapy. His digestive tract perforated twice, and
he subsequently died. An autopsy revealed that aortic intimal sarcoma caused stenosis in multiple arteries. Both polyarteritis nodosa and
aortic intimal sarcoma are very rare diseases and the diagnoses are very difficult. It is very important to consider these entities when
making a differential diagnosis of vasculitis. Aortic intimal sarcoma is a rare malignant tumor. Its diagnosis is often delayed because its
symptoms and imaging mimic occlusive atherosclerotic disease or vasculitis (1), thus it is primarily diagnosed during surgery or an autopsy
(2). Polyarteritis nodosa (PAN) is a systemic necrotizing vasculitis that typically affects medium-sized muscular arteries. Patients with
PAN present various symptoms (including fatigue, weight loss, a fever, hypertension, renal insufficiency, and abdominal pain) due to
vasculitis, which is also relatively rare. The differential diagnosis of aortic intimal sarcoma and PAN is challenging due to similar
symptoms. We herein present a case of aortic intimal sarcoma that was considered to be PAN before definite diagnosis was made at autopsy. A
61-year-old man had visited his local clinic for lumbago and fatigue 4 months previously and was diagnosed with hypertension. He began
taking antihypertensive drugs (amlodipine and valsartan). Because his left kidney was atrophic on abdominal ultrasound, he was advised to
undergo further assessments for hypertension. In the previous hospital, an obstruction at the origin of the left renal artery was detected
by magnetic resonance angiography (MRA) and renal scintigraphy (Fig. 1). After 3 months, his body weight had decreased by 6 kg and his renal
function had also deteriorated. He developed a low-grade fever and elevated inflammatory reaction. Therefore, he was referred to our
hospital and hospitalization was planned. The day before his scheduled hospitalization, he suddenly developed strong abdominal pain and was
emergently admitted to our hospital. A physical examination showed a blood pressure of 168/87 mmHg, body temperature of 37.6℃, and abdominal
tenderness. Although he had severe abdominal pain, no abnormalities were detected by non-contrast computed tomography (CT) or abdominal
ultrasound. Laboratory data on admission revealed the following: leukocytes, 12,600 cells/μL (neutrophil 93.0%); C-reactive protein level,
15.7 mg/dL; blood urea nitrogen, 40 mg/dL; creatinine, 6.92 mg/dL; urinary protein, 2+; urinary blood, 1+; and antineutrophil cytoplasmic
antibodies (ANCA), negative (Table). As he had hypertension, acute progressive renal failure, and renal artery stenosis, the patient was
diagnosed with probable PAN according to the 2006 criteria of the Ministry of Health, Labour and Welfare in Japan (3). He received steroid
pulse treatment, followed by 1 mg/kg/day of prednisolone, and his abdominal pain subsequently improved. However, his renal function
deteriorated, and he started hemodialysis on the 7th hospital day. His abdominal pain again worsened on the 16th hospital day. A contrast-
enhanced CT scan revealed a perforation in the digestive tract, which was causing his abdominal pain, and he subsequently abdominal surgery.
A perforation measuring 6 mm in diameter and located 40 cm from the ileocecum was identified and closed. Perforation of the digestive tract
recurred days after surgery. Surgical findings revealed that the perforation that was at the same site, but larger, measuring 2 cm in
diameter, and multiple ulcers were detected in the ileum. Partial ileal resection, including approximately 30 cm of the perforated lesion,
was performed. As the resected ileum contained multiple ulcers, we considered that angiitis was not being sufficiently controlled
(cytomegalovirus in the resected specimen was not examined at this time). Consequently, steroid pulse treatment and a daily administration
of cyclophosphamide (50 mg/day) with antibiotic drugs were added. However, his general condition deteriorated and he died on the 35th
hospital day. Magnetic resonance angiography of the abdominal lesion and renal scintigraphy. A: Magnetic resonance angiography of the
abdominal lesion showed an obstruction at the origin of the left renal artery (arrow). B: Renal scintigraphy with technetium-99m diethylene
triamine pentaacetic acid (99mTc-DTPA) showed a weak accumulation, and the uptake in the left renal artery was much weaker (arrow).
Laboratory Data on Admission. Abbreviations: Ab: antibody, Alb: albumin, ALP: alkaline phosphatase, ALT: alanine aminotransferase, ANA:
anti-nuclear antibody, ANCA: anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibody, APTT: activated partial thromboplastin time, AST: L-aspartate
aminotransferase, BUN: blood urea nitrogen, CK: creatine kinase, Cl: chlorine, Cr: creatinine, CRP: C-reactive protein, Eo: eosinocyte, GBM:
glomerular basement membrane, Hb: hemoglobin, Ht: hematocrit, K: potassium, LDH: lactate dehydrogenase, Lym: lymphocyte, Mo: monocyte, MPO:
myeloperoxidase, Na: sodium, Neu: neutrophil, Plt: platelet, PR3: proteinase 3, PT-INR: prothrombin- time international normalized ratio,
RAPA: rheumatoid arthritis particle agglutination, RF: rheumatoid factor, T-Bil: total bilirubin, TP: total protein, WBC: white blood cell,
γ-GTP: γ-glutamyl transferase An autopsy was performed with the family's consent. The wall of the abdominal aorta was irregularly thick and
its lumen was rough (Fig. 2A). When we carefully reviewed the contrast-enhanced CT scan of the 1st perforation, we found that it showed an
irregular lumen in the aorta (Fig. 2B) and corresponded with the anatomical findings. The superficial layer of the lumen was composed of
spindle and ovoid cells with hyperchromatic nuclei (Fig. 3A and B). The origin of the celiac artery and both renal arteries was occluded
(Fig. 2C) with cells of similar morphology (Fig. 3C and D). These dysplastic cells had also proliferated in the liver, splenic, and
pulmonary arteries. Immunohistochemical staining of these cells showed positivity for vimentin and negativity for AE1/AE3, 34βE12,
h-caldesmon, αFP, hepatocyte, α smooth muscle actin, desmin, CD31, and CD34 (data not shown). No sign of angiitis was detected in any organ.
According to these findings, the patient was diagnosed with undifferentiated aortic intimal sarcoma. Macroscopic findings of the abdominal
aorta. A: The wall was irregularly thick and the lumen was rough. B: Contrast-enhanced computed tomography of the abdomen on the 16th
hospital day showed the irregular wall of the abdominal aorta (circle). C: Both the renal arteries (*1: right, *2: left) and celiac artery
(*3) were occluded at the origin. *4: superior mesenteric artery. Histological findings. A: Spindle and ovoid cells with hyperchromatic
nuclei proliferated in the superficial lumen of the abdominal aorta (Hematoxylin and Eosin (H&E) staining 20×, B: 400×). C: Spindle and
ovoid cells with hyperchromatic nuclei were also observed in the left renal artery (H&E staining 20×, D: 400×). The intestine contained
multiple ulcers with cytomegalovirus inclusion bodies, but no sign of angiitis. Cytomegalovirus colitis was considered to have caused the
perforation of the intestine. The autopsy results identified the cause of death as purulent peritonitis. The causes of renal artery stenosis
include atherosclerosis, fibromuscular dysplasia, and vasculitis. We initially considered vasculitis as the cause of renal artery stenosis
in this case and diagnosed the patient with PAN according to the Japanese Ministry of Health, Labour and Welfare 2006 criteria (3). However,
the autopsy identified tumor cells as the cause of renal artery stenosis, leading to the diagnosis of aortic intimal sarcoma. Aortic sarcoma
is a rare malignant tumor and its diagnosis is often delayed in clinical settings. It is frequently misdiagnosed as vasculitis, arteritis,
or occlusive or aneurysmal atherosclerosis based on an elevated inflammatory reaction, dilated aorta on imaging, or the symptoms presented
(1). A previous report was also initially diagnosed with PAN (4), similar to the present case. Aortic sarcoma is a malignant tumor that is
considered to develop from intimal subendothelial mesenchymal cells or mural myofibroblastic cells. Rusthoven, et al. (2) performed a
systemic review of aortic sarcoma in the English literature and analyzed 165 cases reported since 1873, when it was initially described by
Brodowsk. Aortic sarcoma is classified as intimal and mural according to its anatomic origin, with intimal sarcoma accounting for 66.7% of
all cases. The most common histology is undifferentiated tumors (39.4%), followed by angiosarcoma (37%) and smooth muscle or leiomyosarcoma
(13.3%). Forty-three cases (26.1%) were diagnosed by an autopsy, while the other 122 cases were diagnosed by surgery. Of the 122 patients
diagnosed antemortem, 57 (46.7%) were managed with surgical resection, 46 (37.7%) with palliative surgery, and 19 (15.6%) underwent no
tumor-directed surgery. Chemotherapy use was reported in 35 cases (28.7%). Radiation therapy directed to the primary aortic tumor was
reported in 18 cases (14.7%) and to sites of metastatic disease in 17 cases (13.9%). The estimated median survival was 11 months in the 122
patients diagnosed antemortem. The factors associated with an improved survival were reported to be the absence of metastatic disease at the
diagnosis and management with surgical resection according to univariate analysis. Thus, a positive diagnosis and surgery are very
important. Although imaging is used for its diagnosis, the differentiation of aortic intimal sarcoma from vasculitis or atherosclerosis on
CT or magnetic resonance imaging is challenging (1). Previous studies reported that the findings of aortic sarcoma (5) and PAN (6) on CT
were luminal irregularities and stenosis or occlusion of the aortic branch. However, aneurysms and segmental ectasia have been observed in
61% of PAN, and less frequently in sarcoma cases. This may assist in the differential diagnosis of aortic sarcoma and PAN. MRA with
gadolinium has also been reported to be useful in the diagnosis of aortic sarcoma, because it can differentiate the tumor from the aortic
wall and atheromatous thrombus and aid in the identification of periaortic extension by demonstrating tumoral enhancement (5). Additionally,
it has few risks of embolization or contrast-induced renal failure associated with conventional angiography (7). 18F-ﬂuorodeoxyglucose (FDG)
positron emission tomography/CT may be more useful in the differentiation between a tumor and thrombus, as aortic sarcomas exhibit a
significant FDG uptake (5,8). In this case, we were unable to perform an accurate diagnosis based on MRA and contrast-enhanced CT. However,
both aortic sarcoma and PAN are rare diseases and difficult to diagnose, thus we must consider a wide spectrum of differential diagnoses in
suspected case of vasculitis. We thank Shuuichi Iwahashi MD, Jun Higashijima MD, PhD and Mitsuo Shimada MD, PhD, Department of Digestive and
Pediatric Surgery, Institute of Biomedical Sciences, Tokushima University Graduate School.
