Proximal-type epithelioid sarcoma is a rare soft tissue neoplasm which arises from the more proximal part of body and occurs more often in
young people; the definite diagnosis depends mainly on the pathological examination; early detection and complete excision remain the
foundation of treatment. Due to its aggressive behavior, high capacity of recurrence and the great ability to metastasize, a careful
clinical long-term monitoring is required. We report a new case of a 20 years old girl, presented with proximal-type epithelioid sarcoma in
her right scapular region, confirmed by pathological examination and removed surgically without recurrence or metastasis at eighteen months
of follow-up. Proximal-type epithelioid sarcoma (PES) is a rare high grade soft-tissue sarcoma (less than 1 of all soft tissue sarcomas),
typically presenting as a subcutaneous or deep dermal mass, with slow growing and high potential for distant metastasis in adolescents and
young adults . These tumors arise in proximal locations (trunk, axilla, genital area…), have a much worse prognosis if delayed diagnosis and
treatment. Owing to its rarity, aggressive behavior, high capacity of recurrence and the difficulty of its clinical and histopathological
diagnosis, we report a new case of a 20 years old girl, presented with proximal-type epithelioid sarcoma in her right scapular region
removed and treated successfully. A 20 years old girl presented with a red and farm nodule since 2 years in her right scapular region; a
first simple excision was performed and was in favor of a benign lesion (fibrous histiocytoma). The lesion recurred clinically six months
later as two farms painless nodules and a solid plaque measuring 3.5cm in diameter (Figure 1). There was no lymphadenopathy. The rereading
of the histopathological slides made the diagnosis of superficial subcutaneous epithelioid sarcoma and a chest and abdominal computed
tomography ruled out metastasis. Wide excision with surgical margins of 4 cm was performed taking the deep fascial plane (Figure 2). The
histological examination confirmed the diagnosis with complete resection limits (Figure 3). In immunohistochemical staining, the tumor cells
were immunoreactive for vimentin and epithelial markers (cytokeratin, CD34). The loss of substance left in granulation for a few days, was
grafted by thin skin (Figure 4). There was no recurrence or metastasis at eighteen months of follow-up. The two farms painless nodules and a
solid plaque on the right scapular region A loss of substance in granulation after wide excision Microscopic appearance of the surgical
specimen showing weakly eosinophilic epithelioid and elongated cells exhibiting slight nuclear atypia (Hematoxylin and Eosin × 250) Coverage
of the loss of substance by graft of thin skin Epithelioid sarcoma was first described by Enzinger in 1970 ; usually arises in the distal
extremities in adolescents and young adults with male prevalence; the proximal-type variant, first described in 1997 as an aggressive form
of sarcoma with a great ability to metastasize and high capacity of recurrence, usually arises more proximally . Proximal-type epithelioid
sarcomas (PES), occur 94% in the chest wall, inguinal region, thigh and perineum, Its size at presentation varies from 0.5 to 19 cm , and
growth duration ranges from 6 months to 5 years . This uncommon neoplasm is a pitfall in clinical diagnosis and it is likely to be confused
with benign lesions resulting in delayed diagnosis and treatment . PES can be diagnosed only through histological examination showing a
pleomorphic epithelioid and oval spindled malignant cells with numerous mitoses exhibiting slight nuclear atypia, vesicular nuclei and small
nucleoli, transition between the two cell types is gradual and intercellular collagen deposition usually marked [4, 8]; it can be
distinguished from poorly differentiated carcinoma, rhabdomyosarcoma, synovial sarcoma, malignant mesothelioma, and melanoma using
immunohistochemistry . Immunohistochemically, PES is characteristically immunoreactive for vimentin and epithelial markers: low and high
molecular weight cytokeratins, keratin 8, keratin 19 and/or EMA. Half of the cases are also positive for CD34 . Several publications about
misdiagnosis and prognosis of PES have been raised currently. Fisher et al emphasize the importance of using immunohistochemicals markers to
the diagnostic of specific soft tissue tumors specially co-expression of CD34 and cytokeratins in PES cells. Mannan et al report a case of
PES in a 47-year-old man, to emphasize the importance of diagnosing of this challenging tumor and the role of immunohistochemistry in
establishing the diagnosis. Wide local excision with adequate margins (at least 2 cm) is recommended ; adjuvant radiotherapy is advocated in
high-grade tumors or inadequate surgical margins , and also due to high incidence of local recurrence and distant metastasis , However it is
controversial and it did not show statistically significant reduction in mortality . The role of chemotherapy in the adjuvant setting
appears marginally effective at best in the treatment of metastatic disease . The prognosis for PES remains worse; despite negative surgical
margins, tendency to recur is highly possible and distant metastasis eventually occurs in up to 60% of cases Ulbright et al. reported in
their review of the literature that all patients with local recurrence ultimately died from distant metastasis. Our patient had initially a
2- years history of a progressively growing nodule over the right scapular region, which could be considered as a proximal type variant. As
the lesion was recurrent a wider excision with surgical margins of 4 cm was performed. The histological examination and immunohistochemistry
confirmed the diagnosis of PES. She underwent no postoperative adjuvant therapy and she is well without recurrence at eighteen months of
follow-up. PES is a rare disease with aggressive behavior and poor prognosis. Early detection, radical surgical excision and
histopathological examination are crucial to provide a chance of a cure. The wide variability of clinical expressions and totally
unpredictable evolutionary nature require regular long-term monitoring in detecting local recurrence and distant metastasis. Authors declare
no competing interest. The authors have read the final version of this manuscript.
