Alexander disease (AxD) is a rare neurological disease, especially in adults. It shows variable clinical and radiological features. We
diagnosed a female with AxD presenting with paroxysmal numbness of the limbs at the onset age of 28-year-old, progressing gradually to
spastic paraparesis at age 30. One year later, she had ataxia, bulbar paralysis, bowel and bladder urgency. Her mother had a similar
neurological symptoms and died within 2 years after onset (at the age of 47), and her maternal aunt also had similar but mild symptoms at
the onset age of 54-year-old. Her brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed abnormal signals in periventricular white matter with severe
atrophy in the medulla oblongata and thoracic spinal cord, and mild atrophy in cervical spinal cord, which is unusual in the adult form of
AxD. She and her daughter’s glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP) gene analysis revealed the same heterozygous missense mutation,
c.1246C > T, p.R416W, despite of no neurological symptoms in her daughter. Our case report enriches the understanding of the familial adult
AxD. Genetic analysis is necessary when patients have the above mentioned symptoms and signs, MRI findings, especially with family history.
Alexander disease (AxD, OMIM 203450) is a rare but fatal central nervous system disease. Three subtypes are distinguished upon the onset
age: infantile (under age 2), juvenile (age 2 to 12) and adult (over age 12). The infantile form is the most common subtype while the adult
onset the least. All subtypes have been described and present with different clinical manifestations. However, the pathological hallmark of
the disease is the accumulation of ubiquitinated intracytoplasmic inclusions in astrocytes, called rosenthal fibers, which are composed of
glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP), the main intermediate filament of astrocytes . The adult cases can be distinguished in familial or
sporadic form. Here, we present a case of adult onset AxD with family pedigree. A 34-year-old female was evaluated at our hospital with a
6-year history of progressive neurological symptoms. At age 28, she developed paroxysmal numbness in the left limbs, and two years later she
had unilateral limb weakness. She was misdiagnosed as multiple sclerosis at the other hospital 2 years after onset. After high-dose pulse
methylprednisolone therapy, the illness had no mitigation. The above mentioned symptoms progressively worsened. At age 31, she subsequently
developed ataxia, dysarthria, depression, and bowel and bladder urgency with occasional incontinence. And her hands became mild muscle
atrophy one year later. She denied any medical history before. Her mother had a similar neurological symptoms and died within 2 years after
onset (at the age of 47), and her maternal aunt also had similar but mild symptoms at the onset age of 54 years old. Her 8-year-old daughter
didn’t present with any neurological symptoms but had brain lesions. Other family members were healthy (Fig. 1).Fig. 1Family pedigree. Black
filled symbols represent patients. Grey filled symbols refer to patient’s daughter who had GFAP mutations but without neurological signs or
symptoms. Empty symbols represent healthy subjects. Half-filled symbols refer to presumably affected ancestor. Question marks mean subjects
potentially affected without neurological signs or symptoms, not examined nor tested for GFAP mutations. Oblique slash means the deceased.
Black arrow mark represents the propositus (our patient). Patient III-3 and her daughter (patient IV-4) performed the molecular diagnosis.
Although the family member (II-1) had similar psychological manifestations, the detailed medical record was not obtained and not examined
for GFAP mutations Family pedigree. Black filled symbols represent patients. Grey filled symbols refer to patient’s daughter who had GFAP
mutations but without neurological signs or symptoms. Empty symbols represent healthy subjects. Half-filled symbols refer to presumably
affected ancestor. Question marks mean subjects potentially affected without neurological signs or symptoms, not examined nor tested for
GFAP mutations. Oblique slash means the deceased. Black arrow mark represents the propositus (our patient). Patient III-3 and her daughter
(patient IV-4) performed the molecular diagnosis. Although the family member (II-1) had similar psychological manifestations, the detailed
medical record was not obtained and not examined for GFAP mutations Her general medical examination was unremarkable. In neurological
examination, she had normal mental status and language testing. The mixed spastic-ataxic dysarthria and horizontal gaze nystagmus were
noted. Myokymia was observed in lingualis with weakness of bulbar muscles. Her hands showed mild muscular atrophy. The muscles strength of
the bilateral upper-extremities, the left lower-extremity, the right lower-extremity were grade 4, 2, 1, respectively. The increased tendon
reflexes and the positive Babinski signs were observed bilaterally. Ataxia was observed in bilateral upper limbs. There was no apparent
sensory deficit or extrapyramidal signs. The latest score of modified Rankin scale is 4. Serum laboratory studies showed unremarkable
(complete blood count, routine chemistry test, clotting studies, electrolyte panel, creatinine, glucose, liver and renal function tests,
vitamin B12, vitamin E, folic acid, autoimmune antibodies, and infection including hepatitis virus antibodies, Treponema serology, HIV
antibodies). Cerebrospinal fluid examination showed a normal opening pressure, the cell count, protein, glucose, IgG index, anti-aquaporin-4
antibody, and intrathecal IgG synthesis rate without oligoclonal bands. Electroencephalogram, electrophysiological, visual evoked potential,
as well as all of the autonomic nervous system testing were all normal 2 years after onset except aural conduction in their brainstem evoked
potential. Her brain MRI demonstrated bilateral and symmetric abnormal signals without gadolinium enhancement, which were predominantly
distributed in the periventricular, and subcortical white matter. Diffusion Weighted Imaging (DWI) revealed slightly hyperintensity in the
periventricular areas. Magnetic resonance angiography was normal [Fig. 2]. The marked atrophy of the medullary oblongata and thoracic spinal
cord was seen, while the atrophy of cervical spinal cord was relatively mild. Abnormal T2 hyperintensity was noted in the pyramidal tract of
spine. With symptoms progressively worsening, medullary and cerebellar atrophy accelerated [Fig. 3]. Her daughter brain MRI showed
abnormality in the periventricular white matter [Fig. 4].Fig. 2Axial Brain MRI showed low T1-weighted signals (a), high T2-weighted signals
(b), and hyperintensity in FLAIR image(c) around the periventricular area. MRI with contrast enhancement was normal (d). DWI revealed slight
hyperintensity (e). MRA were normal (f) Fig. 3Axial spinal MRI showed hyperintensity involving the corticospinal tracts extends from the
carotid 2 (a arrowhead) to carotid 7 cord (b arrowhead) in T2WI image, mild atrophy of cervical spinal cord in sagittal T1WI image (c),
severe atrophy of whole thoracic segments in sagittal T2WI image, which is similar to the typical “tadpole” (d), medullary atrophy at
3 years after onset (e, f), and severe medulla and cerebellar atrophy 1 years later (g, h) Fig. 4Axial FLAIR image of the asymptomatic
daughter of our patient show band-like hyperintense lesions around the lateral ventricle Axial Brain MRI showed low T1-weighted signals (a),
high T2-weighted signals (b), and hyperintensity in FLAIR image(c) around the periventricular area. MRI with contrast enhancement was normal
(d). DWI revealed slight hyperintensity (e). MRA were normal (f) Axial spinal MRI showed hyperintensity involving the corticospinal tracts
extends from the carotid 2 (a arrowhead) to carotid 7 cord (b arrowhead) in T2WI image, mild atrophy of cervical spinal cord in sagittal
T1WI image (c), severe atrophy of whole thoracic segments in sagittal T2WI image, which is similar to the typical “tadpole” (d), medullary
atrophy at 3 years after onset (e, f), and severe medulla and cerebellar atrophy 1 years later (g, h) Axial FLAIR image of the asymptomatic
daughter of our patient show band-like hyperintense lesions around the lateral ventricle Her genomic DNA was extracted from the peripheral
leucocytes when an informed consent was obtained from the patient and her husband. A heterogeneous missense mutation was detected in exon 8
(c.1246C > T) of the GFAP gene, causing a change of arginine to tryptophan at amino acid position 416 (p.R416W). Her daughter’s genomic DNA
showed the same heterozygous mutation but without any neurological symptoms [Fig. 5]. Upon clinical, family history, MRI finding and gene
analysis, she was confirmed as adult AxD.Fig. 5The chromatograms of sequencing results. a The patient. b The daughter. c The control. In the
area of the GFAP gene exon 8, there is a heterogeneous missense mutation point: c.1246C > T (cytosine > thymine, Aarrowhead), leading to
amino acid change in p.R416W (arginine > tryptophan) The chromatograms of sequencing results. a The patient. b The daughter. c The control.
In the area of the GFAP gene exon 8, there is a heterogeneous missense mutation point: c.1246C > T (cytosine > thymine, Aarrowhead), leading
to amino acid change in p.R416W (arginine > tryptophan) This case with AxD is characterized by typical clinical and MRI findings, especially
with family history and adult onset. The heterozygous missense mutation in the GFAP gene, c.1246C > T, p.R416W was identified, which was
already shown to be pathogenic in adult onset AxD [2, 3]. It has been reported that adult AxD has various clinical courses. Most cases have
a subacute onset and gradually progressive course , but some present an acute onset . There is no gender difference. About half of the cases
is familial, consistent with autosomal dominant transmission. The mean age of onset is usually in the late thirties. Our patient had
pseudobulbar, spastic paresis and ataxia, which are acknowledged as the cardinal triad of the clinical presentations and appear in
approximately 70 % of cases [2, 4, 5]. Palatal myoclonus, which is specific and essential for AxD diagnosis, is only observed in one third,
especially in hereditary cases , not seen in our patient. Nearly 45 % of reported patients had autonomic dysfunction including bowel/bladder
dysfunction and orthostatic hypotension , which was found in our patient. Typical MRI findings included marked signal periventricular
changes, atrophy of the bulbar region and upper cervical spinal cord in adult AxD [2, 7]. Approximately 90 % cases showed marked medullary
atrophy and 50 % had deep white matter lesions or periventricular changes . Farina et al. reported that patients under 40 years old were
easier to have periventricular white matter abnormalities and postcontrast enhancement than patients over 40, which showed different levels
of abnormal diffusivity On DWI, but some cases were normal . In our case, MRI findings showed the severe atrophy in bulbar region and
thoracic spinal cord, but mild atrophy in cervical spinal cord, which is rare in the adult AxD. On DWI, our patient had slightly
hyperintensity of extensive periventricular white matter. The lesions without gadolinium enhancement might be related to the decreased
amounts and limited distribution of rosenthal fibers . It should be stressed that MRI findings in our case was atypical despite of the
lesion locating in the typical regions. In the radiologic differential diagnosis of adult AxD, several disorders need to be considered .
Diseases like degenerative disorders, particularly progressive supranuclear palsy, multisystem atrophy with cerebellar predominance, and
various spinocerebellar ataxias often have brain stem and cerebellum atrophy but without lesions in periventricular white matter . Besiedes,
some leukodystrophies which are similar to adult AxD were described below (see Table 1) [5, 10–17].Table 1The characteristics of common
leukodystrophies in adultDiseaseClinical presentationAbnormal regions or abnormalities on brain MRIGene mutationsX-ALDSPCST, dorsal columns,
CC, PWMABCD1Metachromatic leukodystrophyPP, motor impairmentbilateral frontal PWM, CC; cortical atrophyARSAKrabbe’s disease (GALC)SP or
tetraparesis, PDPN, CD, seizures, cortical blindnessSupratentorial, CWM, PT, splenium of CC and optic radiation, CST; CC atrophyGALCVWM
(CACH)migraine, PP, dementia, PBP, SPenlargement of the lateral ventricles; WMEIF2BHDLS/POLDbehavioral changes, dementia, motor impairment,
epilepsyinternal capsules, CST; WM with non-enhancing; frontal lobes atrophyCSF1RADLDAS, BBD, OH, PS, ataxiafrontoparietal WM, CP, CST,
CCLMNB1Cerebrotendinous xanthomatosisPP, SP, CA, polyneuropathy, tendon xanthomatasdentate nucleus, CWM, CP, PT, PWN, CC, basal ganglia;
brain and cerebellar atrophyCYP27A1NHD/PLOSLPP, memory loss, dementia, skeletal abnormalitiesnonspecific WM; cortical atrophyTREM2
DAP12CADASILmigraines, TIA, strokes, PP, CDPWM in the centrum semiovale, external capsules and anterior temporal polesNOTCH3CARASILTIA,
strokesdiffuse WM changes, lacunar infarctsHTRA1 X-ALD X-linked adrenoleukodystrophy, VWM Vanishing white matter disease, CACH childhood
ataxia with central hypomylination, HDLS hereditary diffuse leukoencephalopathy with neuroaxonal spheroids, POLD Autosomal dominant
pigmentary type of orthochromatic leucodystrophy, ADLD Adult-onset autosomal dominant leukodystrophy, NHD Nasu-Hakola disease, PLOSL
polycystic lipomembranous osteodysplasia with sclerosing leukoencephalopathy, SP spastic paraparesis, PP psychiatric problems, PBP
pseudobulbar palsy, WM white matter, CWM cerebellar WM, PT pyramidal tracts, CD cognitive decline, AS autonomic symptoms, BBD bowel and
bladder dysfunction, OH orthostatic hypotension, PS pyramidal symptoms, CA cerebellar ataxia, TIA transient ischemic attacks, PDPN
peripheral demyelinating polyneuropathy, CST corticospinal tracts, CC corpus callosum, PWM periventricular WM, CP cerebellar peduncles The
characteristics of common leukodystrophies in adult X-ALD X-linked adrenoleukodystrophy, VWM Vanishing white matter disease, CACH childhood
ataxia with central hypomylination, HDLS hereditary diffuse leukoencephalopathy with neuroaxonal spheroids, POLD Autosomal dominant
pigmentary type of orthochromatic leucodystrophy, ADLD Adult-onset autosomal dominant leukodystrophy, NHD Nasu-Hakola disease, PLOSL
polycystic lipomembranous osteodysplasia with sclerosing leukoencephalopathy, SP spastic paraparesis, PP psychiatric problems, PBP
pseudobulbar palsy, WM white matter, CWM cerebellar WM, PT pyramidal tracts, CD cognitive decline, AS autonomic symptoms, BBD bowel and
bladder dysfunction, OH orthostatic hypotension, PS pyramidal symptoms, CA cerebellar ataxia, TIA transient ischemic attacks, PDPN
peripheral demyelinating polyneuropathy, CST corticospinal tracts, CC corpus callosum, PWM periventricular WM, CP cerebellar peduncles
Beside, asymptomatic carriers with MRI abnormalities have been described in some reports [2, 6, 8, 18–23]. Here we listed several
asymptomatic carriers similar to our patient’s daughter who had abnormal brain MRI and carrying the gene mutation (see Table 2).Table 2The
information of asymptomatic carriers with MRI abnormalitiesPatient ReferenceGenderAge (years)MRI scanNucleotide changeAminoacid
substitutionPatient 1 Male62Mild cervicomedullary atrophyc.232G > Ap.D78NPatient 2 Male32Atrophy of medulla oblongata and spinal cord,
Periventricular rimc. 274 T > Gp.V87GPatient 3 Male33Atrophy of medulla oblongata and spinal cord, white matter lesion, periventricular
rimc. 274 T > Gp.V87GPatient 4 Male a<4Frontal white matter abnormalityc.276C > Tp.R88CPatient 5 Male30Supratentorial periventricular white
matter, atrophy of medulla oblongata and cervical cordc.613G > Ap.E205KPatient 6 Male32Periventricular rim, atrophy of
medullac.988C > Gp.R330Gc.994G > Ap.E332KPatient 7 Female34Mild abnormal intensities in the deep frontal white matter and
caudatesc.1006 T > Cp.L331PPatient 8 Male72Atrophy of the upper cervical cord medullaoblongata and cerebellarc.1157A > Gp.N386SPatient 9
Male52Supratentorial periventricular white matter, atrophy of medulla oblongata and cervical cordc. 1193C > Ap.S398YPatient 10 Male
a<11White matter of the cerebellum, medulla, pons changesc.1260C > Tp.R416Wc.154C > Tp.P47L aNo age at onset is reported for Patients 4 and
10; evaluation for leukodystrophy was initiated only after incidental findings of white matter changes were discovered by MRI performed as
part of examination for other conditions The information of asymptomatic carriers with MRI abnormalities aNo age at onset is reported for
Patients 4 and 10; evaluation for leukodystrophy was initiated only after incidental findings of white matter changes were discovered by MRI
performed as part of examination for other conditions Mutations in the GFAP gene, which lead to the accumulation of ubiquitinated
intracytoplasmic inclusions in rosenthal fibers in association with the small heat shock proteins, HSP27 and aB-crystallin , are thought to
account for more than 95 % of AxD cases . In infantile [3, 25, 26], juvenile [20, 27] and sporadic adult AxD , the heterozygous missense
mutation of the GFAP gene, c.1246C > T, p.R416W, has been reported to be one of the causes of AxD. While In familial adult onset AxD it has
been rarely reported. Thyagarajan described a woman and her son with adult onset AxD and the above mutation . They had different clinical
manifestations but strikingly similar MRI abnormalities and the same GFAP mutation. It means that molecularly characterized inherited AxD is
a cause of symptoms. The same GFAP mutation can cause both early and late onset AxD, and vertical transmission occurs in adult onset AxD
with GFAP mutations. Our patient, her mother and maternal aunt had similar neurological manifestations but the latter two had a relative
later onset. Nevertheless, her mother’s clinical manifestations deteriorated rapidly, her maternal aunt has mild symptoms with comparatively
slow progress. She and her daughter had the same heterozygous missense mutation. All these findings suggest that the familial Adult AxD
members can possibly show either similar or different manifestations. The molecular genetic evidence of our AxD family favors that AxD is an
autosomal dominant inheritance , but further long-term follow-up is needed. In summary, our case report enriches the understanding of the
familial adult AxD. Genetic analysis is necessary when patients have the above mentioned symptoms and signs, MRI findings, especially with
family history. Alexander disease Deoxyribonucleic acid Diffusion Weighted Imaging Fluid attenuated inversion recovery Glial fibrillary
acidic protein Human immunodeficiency virus Magnetic resonance angiography Magnetic resonance imaging T1-weighted imaging T2-weighted
imaging The authors would like to thank the patient’s family and the Beijing JinZhun Gene Technology Co., Ltd. The work couldn’t be done
without their participation and help. We receive no funding support. Not applicable. For protecting patient privacy. Study design and
drafting of manuscript: YL, XZ. Clinical study perform: YL, XZ, HZ. Genetic analysis: HZ, HW. Acquisition and interpretation of data: YL,
XG, AZ, LZ, XL. Critical revision of the manuscript: XH, HW, YL. All authors have read and approved the final manuscript. The authors
declare that they have no competing interests. Written informed consents were obtained from the patient for publication of this case report
and any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor of this journal. This case report has been
approved by the Beijing Tiantan Hospital, Capital Medical University’s Research Ethics Board. Written informed consent was obtained from the
patient and her families for genetic analysis and publication of this case report.
