Antisynthetase syndrome is a rare autoimmune disease characterized by interstitial lung disease and/or inflammatory myositis, with positive
antisynthetase antibodies (anti-Jo-1, anti-PL-7, anti-PL-12, ZO, OJ, anti-KE or KS). Other symptoms described include: non-erosive
arthritis, fever, Raynaud's phenomenon, and "mechanic's hands." The first therapeutic option is corticotherapy, followed by other
immunosuppressants. The prognosis of the disease is quite limited when compared to other inflammatory myopathies with negative
antisynthetase antibodies. A woman patient, 41 years of age, presented a dry cough and dyspnea upon moderate exertion, which has become
progressively worse over the past four years. Six months ago, the patient presented proximal muscle weakness and wrist arthralgia. She
sought out the Dermatology department due to a peeling of the edges of the fingers, without pruritus; periungual erythema; changes in nails
and fingers (Figure 1). Physical examination identified a crackling sound in the lungs. On the hands, one could observe Raynaud phenomenon,
peeling, and marginal hyperqueratosis ("mechanic's hands"); longitundinal hypercurvature of the nail plate; paronychia; reduction in the
volume of finger tissue (digital pulp), with no ulcerations, sclerodactyly or punctiform scars. Capillaroscopy showed folding, ischemic
areas, and dilated flaps, as well as the absence of heliotrope. Laboratory exams included FAN 1:160 (speckled) and positive anti-PL-7. Other
antibodies included antisynthetase, antinuclear, anti-Scl-70, ANCA, and latex proved to be normal. Biochemical exams – VHS 122mm/h; Creatine
phosphokinase 2759U/l (reference<135U/l). Electroneuromyography showed a myopathic pattern. Computed tomography of the thorax showed
interstitial lung disease (ILD) with ground-glass opacity (Figure 2); spirometry disclosed a restrictive pattern, with no response to the
bronchodilator, and the esophagogram was normal. Figure 1 A. Periungual erythema, longitudinal hypercurvature of the ungual lamina and
marginal hyperkeratosis of the first finger. B. Detail of the nail hypercurvature (digital clubbing), retraction of digital pulp, and
marginal peeling of the second finger.(mechanic's hand) A. Periungual erythema, longitudinal hypercurvature of the ungual lamina and
marginal hyperkeratosis of the first finger. B. Detail of the nail hypercurvature (digital clubbing), retraction of digital pulp, and
marginal peeling of the second finger.(mechanic's hand) Figure 2 Computed tomography (high resolution) of the thorax. Fibrosing interstitial
pneumonia with a reticular pattern with areas of ground-glass alveolar opacity and thickness of the septa (inter and intralobuar) with
traction bronchiectasis, predominantly in the lower basal regions Computed tomography (high resolution) of the thorax. Fibrosing
interstitial pneumonia with a reticular pattern with areas of ground-glass alveolar opacity and thickness of the septa (inter and
intralobuar) with traction bronchiectasis, predominantly in the lower basal regions Antisynthetase Syndrome (ASS), described by Marguerie
(1990), represents a rare group of autoimmune diseases that mainly affect women (2:1) between 30 and 50 years of age and present
autoantibodies geared toward the Amino Acyl-tRNA Synthetases enzymatic complex, which catalyzes the connection of an amino acid to the RNAt
protein synthesis.1,5 The diagnostic criteria of ASS are available in chart 1.3 The most common clinical manifestations of ASS include:
inflammatory myositis (>90%), Interstitial Lung Disease (ILD) (60%), non-erosive arthritis (50%), Raynaud phenomenon (40%), "mechanic's
hand" (30%), and fever (20%).6 The main differential diagnoses include progressive systemic sclerosis, dermatomyositis/polymyositis, and
overlap syndromes. Criteria proposed for the diagnosis of antisynthetase syndrome3 The autoantibodies involved in the disease (in order of
frequency) and the amino acids that are targets of RNAt-synthetase are: anti-Jo1 (histidine), anti-PL-12 (alanine), anti-PL-7 (threonine),
anti-OJ (isoleucine), anti-KS (asparagine), anti-EJ (glycine), and anti-ZO (phenylalanine). The phenotype of the disease varies according to
the expressed autoantibody.7 Myopathy occurs more often in patients with anti-Jo-1 or anti-PL-7; anti-Jo-1 is related to the more extreme
cases of arthritis and "mechanic's hand", while anti-PL-7 is associated with the presence of heliotrope; anti-PL-12 with the higher rates of
Raynaud phenomenon; and anti-PL-12, anti-KS, and anti-OJ with cases of isolated ILD.8 To date, no randomized studies have evaluated the
therapeutic effectiveness of ASS.7 The treatment of choice is prednisone at an initial dose of 1mg/Kg/day. Other possibilities described
include: tacrolimus, mycophenolate mofetil, immunoglobin, azathioprine, methotrexate, cyclophosphamide, and cyclosporine.7 Rituximab was
reported to be efficient in the treatment of refractory myositis, but did not influence the evolution of ILD or the loss of pulmonary
function.1,9 The prognosis of ASS is quite limited when compared to other inflammatory myopathies without antisynthetase antibodies, which
results mainly from greater ILD resistance to corticotherapy, evolving into the need for a lung transplant.1,3,10 Our patient was submitted
to oral corticotherapy associated with pulse therapy using cyclophosphamide and, later, with mycophenolate mofetil and rituximab, without,
to date, fully controlling the lung disease. Dermatologists must pay attention to myopathic and/or lung conditions that present the Raynaud
phenomenon, nail dystrophy, repeated periungual/paronychia erythema, atrophy of the digital pulp, and "mechanic's hand" peeling, in an
attempt to collaborate with an early diagnosis of the disease with a limited prognosis Conflict of Interest: None Financial Support: None
Work conducted in the Department of Dermatology and Radiology of Universidade Estadual Paulista "Júlio de Mesquita Filho" (Unesp) – Botucatu
Campus, Botucatu, SP, Brazil.
