The early period of spontaneous recanalization is commonly described as within hours to weeks after internal carotid artery (ICA) occlusion.
Of occlusion due to carotid artery dissection (CAD), early recanalization is observed in 57–69% of cases. CAD is a highly dynamic process
with dramatic morphological changes in the early stage of the disease; however, little is known about the radiographic findings in the
initial week. A 62-year-old male with a history of Type 2 diabetes and long-term smoking presented at Department of Neurology, China-Japan
Friendship Hospital for loss of vision in the left eye and right hemiparesis, which lasted for four days. He denied the history of recent
head and neck trauma or previous radiation to the neck. The history of any valvular or ischemic heart disease was unremarkable. General
physical examination was normal. Neurological examination showed incomplete motor aphasia, right central facial palsy, and right-sided
hemiparesis, with 4 of 5 muscle strength. Routine biochemical tests were normal except for mild elevated triglycerides (1.94 mmol/L) and
glycosylated hemoglobin (7.5%). Other hematologic tests were within normal ranges. The head MRI showed watershed and a small cortical
ischemic infarction in the left cerebral hemisphere with diffusion abnormality on the diffusion-weighted image (DWI), which disclosed the
evidence of acute ischemia in the left ICA territory. Reconstruction of computed tomography angiography (CTA) that was performed six days
after onset confirmed flame-like occlusion of left ICA 2 cm above the carotid artery bifurcation, suggesting ICA dissection [Figure 1a–1c].
A color duplex carotid ultrasound also revealed total occlusion of the left ICA. ECG and echocardiography were normal. Transthoracic
echocardiography did not disclose thrombus formation, valvular disease, or intracardiac shunt pathways. Contrast transesophageal
echocardiography did not find patent foramen ovale or pulmonary arteriovenous malformation. Radiology of the ICA before and after the
spontaneous recanalization of occlusion. Sagittal (a) and axial (b and c) CTA before recanalization showed a flame-like occlusion, and the
white arrows indicated the occlusion located 2 cm above the bifurcation of left ICA (arrows). The DSA (d) revealed recanalization of the
left proximal ICA, without stenosis (arrow). The vessel wall in high resolution MRI (e and f) was smooth (arrows). ICA: Internal carotid
artery; CTA: Computed tomography angiography; DSA: Digital subtraction angiography. Given the history of acute stroke, the absence of heart
abnormalities, and the morphological characteristic of ICA occlusion in CTA, the patient was suspected to have a CAD. He was treated with
100 mg aspirin and 75 mg clopidogrel daily. Then, the patient's neurologic status slightly improved. Digital subtraction angiography (DSA)
was performed 19 days after stroke, revealing spontaneous recanalization of the left proximal ICA with forward flow [Figure 1d]. The left
common carotid artery and the aortic arch were well visualized without any stenosis or atherosclerotic plaque. No surgical intervention was
performed. The carotid ultrasound showed that the thrombus in the left extracranial ICA had disappeared and the blood flow velocity and
waveform had returned to normal. The microembolic screening by transcranial Doppler was carried out one day later, and two microembolic
signals (MES) were observed in the left middle cerebral artery in 30 min. To find out the source of microembolus, the high-resolution MRI
(HRMRI) of cervical artery was performed four days later; however, no typical appearance of dissection or atherosclerotic plaque was found
[Figure 1e and 1f]. In CAD, a tear in the intima of the artery allows blood to enter the wall of the artery and split its layers to form an
intramural hematoma, which can expand to the point that the artery becomes stenotic, irregular, or completely occluded. As the majority of
ICA occlusions are due to atherosclerosis, the differentiation between the atherosclerotic disease and CAD is important. In CAD patients,
the occlusion frequently locates 2–3 cm distal to the common carotid bifurcation and has a tapered, flame-like appearance, which is
consistent with the findings in CTA of our patient. In contrast, atherosclerotic changes usually only locate at the ICA origin. Moreover, in
this case, other causes of ICA occlusion such as trauma, radiation, tumor invasion, fibromuscular dysplasia, and cardiogenic emboli were
ruled out because no relevant evidence was found. Above all, we speculated that the occlusion in our case might be caused by spontaneous
dissection. Nevertheless, several aspects made this case interesting. First, the DSA performed 19 days after onset did not find any features
of dissection such as an intimal flap or a double lumen. The CTA showed the occlusion of ICA after six days of the onset, so the
recanalization should occur in the recent 13 days before DSA. The probability of completely healing of intima or absorption of intramural
hematoma in 13 days was extremely low even though after recanalization. In addition, Akiyama et al. observed the intimal flap persisting
even after vascular recanalization, which was confirmed by the DSA. DSA, which can only show the morphological feature of the lumen, cannot
reveal the feature of the vessel wall, especially after the healing of tear in the intima. Compared with DSA, HRMRI can provide excellent
depiction of both the lumen (occlusion, stenosis, and luminal thrombus) and the vessel wall (crescent mural hematoma, pseudoaneurysm, double
lumen, and intimal tear). Hence, we performed HRMRI, expecting to discover the subtle changes in the vessel wall. Limited previous studies
suggested that, in CAD, the walls of injured vessels are thickened, often with the presence of a demonstrable flap. However, the HRMRI in
this case did not show any specific abnormalities. Second, the detection of MES after recanalization was quite unpredictable. It is reported
that more than 90% of infarcts due to dissection are thromboembolic, and the prevalence of MES in acute CAD varied from 56% to 66%, but the
prevalence after recanalization remains unclear. In this case, DSA and HRMRI did not find any abnormalities in the lumen and vessel wall, so
where the microemboli came from was still unclear. The morphological change in CAD after early recanalization is ill-defined. To our
knowledge, reports regarding the features of both lumen and vessel wall through HRMRI in the early recanalization is rare. Radiology plays a
pivotal role in the analysis of mechanism of recanalization and the decision of treatment. Follow-up in the early period after occlusion is
necessary so as to reveal recanalization timely. This study was supported by a grant from China-Japan Friendship Hospital Youth Science and
Technology Excellence Project (No. 2014-QNYC-A-04). There are no conflicts of interest. Edited by: Qiang Shi
