Authors’ Contribution: Study Design Data Collection Statistical Analysis Data Interpretation Manuscript Preparation Literature Search Funds
Collection Conflict of interest: None declared Patient: Male, 59 Final Diagnosis: Emphysematous epiglottitis Symptoms: Dysphonia •
odynophagia • sore throat Medication: — Clinical Procedure: Direct laryngoscopy with incision and drainage of abscess Specialty:
Otolaryngology Rare disease Despite a shift in the epidemiology of epiglottitis following the introduction of the Haemophilus influenzae
type B vaccine, acute infectious epiglottitis continues to be a relatively common and potentially life-threatening infection in adults.
Epiglottitis complicated by abscess is rare, and emphysematous abscess is even less common. Early diagnosis and intervention is paramount in
reducing morbidity and mortality. Although case reports exist, photographic depiction of this complication is not readily available. We
present the case of a 59-year-old male with rapidly progressive emphysematous epiglottitis managed with awake fiber optic intubation
followed by incision, drainage, and antibiotic therapy. Early recognition and intervention in this patient led to complete resolution of the
infection, with no long-term sequelae. Clinicians should be familiar with the radiographic and endoscopic findings which support an
emphysematous abscess, as well as the treatment and airway management concerns in such cases. Acute infectious epiglottitis is a rapidly
progressive and potentially fatal infection of the upper respiratory tract. Historically, this condition was most commonly seen in children,
resulting from Haemophilus influenzae infections. Following the introduction of the Haemophilus influenzae type B vaccine, there has been a
shift in the etiology and epidemiology of epiglottitis, with a rise in adult infections . Epiglottic abscess formation is a rare
complication of epiglottitis . Epiglottitis complicated by emphysematous abscess formation has been reported even less frequently, and is
not well described . Here, we present a case of an otherwise healthy male patient with emphysematous epiglottitis necessitating awake fiber
optic intubation and surgical drainage. A 59-year-old Caucasian male presented to the emergency department (ED) with a one day history of
odynophagia and dysphagia with rapid progression to dysphonia and inability to swallow his oral secretions. He reported having intermittent
fevers at home, along with fatigue and a productive cough, but denied any breathing difficulties or stridor. The patient had a long history
of smoking, but was otherwise healthy. In the ED, he was afebrile, hypertensive and tachycardic, with a muffled voice quality and productive
cough, but no stridor. Physical examination revealed only tender bilateral cervical lymphadenopathy and pain near the hyoid. Laboratory
workup was remarkable for a leukocytosis of 20.2 k/uL with 91% neutrophils. A computed tomography (CT) scan with intravenous (IV) contrast
of the neck was performed and was significant for a markedly enlarged epiglottis secondary to submucosal emphysema along the lingual surface
(Figure 1). These changes resulted in marked narrowing of the supraglottic airway with sparing of the glottic and subglottic airway.
Inflammatory changes also involved the floor of the mouth, oropharynx and hypopharynx, with multiple small abscesses noted within the left
ventral floor of mouth and right palatine tonsil. Flexible fiber optic laryngoscopy revealed significant pooling of secretions and a
diffusely swollen epiglottis, with moderate edema of the remainder of the supraglottis (Figure 2). The vocal cords had normal mobility and
were not edematous. The patient was taken to the operating room urgently and underwent awake trans-nasal fiber optic intubation followed by
direct laryngoscopy with biopsy and abscess drainage. Although purulence was encountered, unfortunately no cultures were sent for
evaluation. Following decompression of the epiglottis, the trans-nasal tube was exchanged for trans-oral size six cuffed endotracheal tube
and the patient was left intubated, but breathing spontaneously, and admitted to the Intensive Care Unit (ICU). He was treated with IV
ampicillin/sulbactam 1.5 grams (1 gram ampicillin plus 0.5 gram sulbactam) every six hours, and IV dexamethasone at 6 mg every six hours. He
underwent bedside direct laryngoscopy in the ICU approximately 36 hours after his abscess drainage, and this revealed improvement in his
supraglottic edema. He was successfully extubated shortly thereafter, the steroids were discontinued, and he was transitioned to oral
amoxicillin/clavulanic acid, 800/114 mg twice daily. He was discharged on postoperative day three with an additional ten days of
amoxicillin/clavulanic acid, 800/114 mg twice daily. He was fully recovered when seen in our clinic three weeks later, and flexible
laryngoscopy confirmed complete resolution (Figure 3). Final pathology showed reactive squamous mucosa with acute inflammation and abscess
formation. Acute epiglottitis in adults remains a serious and potentially life threatening illness. Despite the decline of Haemophilus
influenza B infections, other common pathogens in epiglottitis now include Streptococcus pneumoniae, β-hemolytic streptococci, and
Staphylococcus aureus . Epiglottic abscesses most commonly involve streptococcus or are polymicrobial . Epiglottic abscess formation is rare
and emphysematous epiglottitis is even less common. It has been hypothesized that epiglottic abscesses are more likely to form in adults
rather than the pediatric population because the larger adult larynx tolerates more inflammation prior to airway compromise, allowing
sufficient time for coalescence . Cases with submucosal emphysema may be more rapidly progressive due to the additional mass effect of
trapped air. Abscess formation complicates airway management and also requires drainage. In this case, the bulbous nature of the epiglottis
necessitated awake fiber optic intubation to avoid further airway compromise with sedation or supine positioning. Loss of tone and supine
positioning may lead to a ball valve mechanism, with complete airway obstruction, and an inability to deliver positive pressure ventilation.
In such cases, the neck may also need to be prepped for tracheotomy. Drainage should always take place after the airway has been secured.
Mortality in cases of epiglottic abscess can be significantly decreased through early detection and initiation of broad spectrum antibiotic
therapy, with transfer to the operating room for airway management and drainage when indicated. Clinicians should be familiar with the
endoscopic and radiologic findings which support an emphysematous epiglottic abscess, as well as the treatment and airway management
concerns that arise in such cases. Contrasted CT of the neck showing submucosal emphysema (arrows) of the lingual surface of the epiglottis
in sagittal and axial planes. Endoscopic examination showing the epiglottis at the time of diagnosis. Endoscopic examination showing the
epiglottis after resolution of infection.
