Blue nevi are benign melanocytic lesions located in the deeper reticular dermis, consequence of failure of melanocytic migration into the
dermal-epidermal junction from the neural crest. Lesions are usually asymptomatic and solitary, but may present in a multiple or agminated
(grouped) pattern. The agminated subtype is formed when bluish-pigmented lesions cluster together in a well-defined area. Lesions can be
flat or raised. We report the case of a patient who presented multiple bluish macules (1-3 mm in diameter) grouped on the left upper back.
Dermoscopy and anatomic pathological examination were consistent with blue nevus. Blue nevi are benign melanocytic lesions located in the
deeper reticular dermis, consequence of failure of melanocytic migration into the dermal-epidermal junction from the neural crest.1 The blue
color is caused by the Tyndall effect, when incident light on the highly pigmented deep melanocytes refracts and scatters.2 Nevi are usually
acquired and usually begin in childhood and adolescence. They are characterized by a bluish or dark-bluish dermal pigmentation area formed
by aberrant collections of benign functioning melanocytes. Lesions are usually asymptomatic and solitary, but may present in a multiple or
agminated (grouped) pattern.3,4 The term "agminated" comes from the Latin word agminis, which means army, troop.5 The agminated subtype is
formed when bluish-pigmented lesions cluster together in a well-defined area ≤ 10cm. Lesions can be flat or raised.1 The first case of
agminated blue nevus was reported by Upshaw et al. in 1947. Since then, authors have used different terms – plaque-type blue nevus or
eruptive blue nevus – to refer to the condition in the few published cases.4,6 Although the pathogenesis of agminated blue nevus is unknown,
some reports suggest that skin traumas or sunburn could stimulate the proliferation of melanocytes.2,7 Lesions can arise on normal skin or
on lentiginous macules. Histologically, the lesions are characterized by highly-pigmented dermal dendritic melanocytes and melanophages.1
Dermoscopy reveal a smooth blue area without structure, absence of pigmented network, globules and dots. Edges are usually irregular and may
fade into the surrounding skin.8 Differential diagnosis should include plaque-type multiple vascular tumors, agminated Spitz nevus and
metastatic melanoma.5 Although the evolution of agminated blue nevus is benign, biopsy is recommended to rule malignant transformation given
the rarity of the lesions.5,6 We report a 64-year-old male patient with Darier's disease on acitretin 30mg/day presented to our clinic for
routine dermatological consultation. Dermatological examination revealed multiple 1-3mm bluish stains, clustered together in an area of
7x5cm on the left upper back (Figures 1 and 2). Since the lesions were asymptomatic, the patient was unable to report the time evolution of
the lesions. Dermatoscopic examination revealed homogeneous bluish or grayish nevi presented with no structures. We observed no pseudopods
or radial striations (Figure 3). Figure 1 Bluish pigmented lesions clustered together in area of 7x5 cm on the upper back Bluish pigmented
lesions clustered together in area of 7x5 cm on the upper back Figure 2 Agminated blue nevus Agminated blue nevus Figure 3 Dermoscopy
revealed homogeneous bluish or grayish nevus with no structures. No pseudopods or radial striations reported Dermoscopy revealed homogeneous
bluish or grayish nevus with no structures. No pseudopods or radial striations reported An incisional biopsy of the lesion was performed to
clarify the diagnosis. Histopathological examination showed brownish pigmented fusiform and oval-shaped melanocytic cells in the upper and
deeper dermis, not forming nests but arranged in bundles and fusiform and oval-shaped melanocytic cells compatible with blue nevus (Figures
4, 5 and 6). Figure 4 Blue nevus (H&E, 40x magnification) Blue nevus (H&E, 40x magnification) Figure 5 Brownish pigmented fusiform and oval-
shaped melanocytic cells in the upper and deeper dermis, not forming nests but arranged in bundles H&E, 100x magnification Brownish
pigmented fusiform and oval-shaped melanocytic cells in the upper and deeper dermis, not forming nests but arranged in bundles H&E, 100x
magnification Figure 6 Fusiform and oval-shaped melanocytic cells H&E, 400x magnification Fusiform and oval-shaped melanocytic cells H&E,
400x magnification Cases of agminated blue nevus are rarely mentioned in the literature, probably underreported because of the asymptomatic
nature of the disease. This is why we report a case of agminated blue nevus on the back of a patient with Darier's disease. We emphasize the
importance of a detailed dermatological examination in patients. Considering that our patient was unaware of the existence of the lesions,
diagnosis should not be limited to patient's complaints. Although agminated blue nevi are usually benign, our patient is being followed up
with periodic dermoscopic examination. Conflict of Interest: None Financial Support: None Work performed at Hospital Universitário Pedro
Ernesto – Universidade do Estado do Rio de Janeiro (HUPE-UERJ) – Rio de Janeiro (RJ), Brazil.
