The aim of the study was to identify Bacillus species from the Demodex folliculorum of patients with topical steroidinduced facial
rosaceiform dermatitis. Of the 75 patients examined, 20% had clinical spinulosis, while 18.66% had dermoscopic features of Demodex:
follicular plugs and tails. Of the 17.33% positive patients identified upon microscopy for Demodex, samples for bacterial culture were
plated on trypticase soy Colombia agar. Identification was performed by microorganisms grown method mass spectrometry. We identified a
strain of Bacillus cereus. Bacillus oleronius isolated from Demodex folliculorum has been identified as a trigger of inflammation in
rosacea.1 Skin lesions associated with an abnormal increase in Demodex mites, classified as secondary demodicosis, occur mostly in patients
undergoing treatment with topical steroids or calcineurin inhibitors.2 The aim of the study was to assess the microbioma in patients with
topical steroid-induced facial rosaceiform dermatitis(TSIFRD) and the possible association between Bacillus and Demodex species. Patients
with TSIFRD were included in this study, entailing clinical examination, dermoscopy and microscopy analysis of Demodex species. Furthermore,
skin biopsies were performed on patients with inflammatory lesions. For the microscopic examination, samples were harvested from the
affected area using a piece of Scotch transparent tape measuring 2cm, which was subsequently displayed in a microscope slide and examined
under optical microscopy (10x-40x Zeiss). The sample for bacterial culture was spun two minutes and plated (trypticase soy agar and Columbia
agar with 5% sheep's blood (Oxoid – Thermo Fischer, UK), then incubated at 37ºC for 48 hours. Identification was performed by microorganisms
grown method MALDI-TOF mass spectrometry (Matrix Assisted Laser Desorption Time-of-Flight ionization - Bruker Daltonik GmbH, Bremen,
Germany). Colonies were transferred, emulsified and centrifuged, the supernatant was removed and the residue reconstituted in 70% formic
acid. Measurements were performed using MALDI-TOF MS Microflex LT through the FlexControl software. The spectra were collected and analyzed
via the Biotyper database (database -5627 Species list). Scores of above 2 were considered significant for genus and species identification.
Mass spectrometry was used to identify the genus and species. The local ethics committee approved the study. Seventy-five patients with
variable TSIFRD subtypes were examined. Dermoscopy revealed: telangiectasias (100% of patients), pustules (80%), scales (54.66%) and atrophy
(20%), as white structureless patches between vessels. Clinical spinulosis was found in 15 patients (20%), of which 14-18.66% bore
dermoscopic features of Demodex: follicular plugs and Demodex tails (Figures 1 and 2). A biopsy performed on one spinulosis area showed a
histopathologically characteristic image (Figure 3). Thirteen patients (17.33%) were positive for Demodex upon microscopy: 8 for D.
folliculorum and 5 for D. brevis (Figures 4 and 5). Among the 8 patients with D. folliculorum, one had positive Bacillus cereus cultures. No
B. oleronius or any other bacillus species were found. An analysis of the macroscopic diagnosis of bacterial cultures of the Bacillus
species oriented morphology B. cereus colonies, which were dull gray and opaque, with a rough matted surface.The genus and species were
identified by mass spectrometry (Figures 6 and 7). Figure 1 Spinulosis of the face Spinulosis of the face Figure 2 Dermoscopic follicular
plugs and Demodex tails Dermoscopic follicular plugs and Demodex tails Figure 3 Histopathology of spinulosis revealed Demodex folliculorum;
hematoxylin/eosine staining,40x Histopathology of spinulosis revealed Demodex folliculorum; hematoxylin/eosine staining,40x Figure 4 Demodex
folliculorum smear,10x Demodex folliculorum smear,10x Figure 5 Demodex brevis smear,20x Demodex brevis smear,20x Figure 6 Bacillus cereus
culture at 72 hours on Colombia agar with 5% sheep's blood Bacillus cereus culture at 72 hours on Colombia agar with 5% sheep's blood Figure
7 The spectrum obtained from the identification of Bacillus cereus by MALDI-TOF spectrometry The spectrum obtained from the identification
of Bacillus cereus by MALDI-TOF spectrometry B. oleronius was isolated from only one dissected Demodex harvested from one patient with
papulopustular rosacea.3 The absence of serum reactivity to Bacillus spp. antigens in 20% of patients with initial rosacea, along with the
presence of antibodies in 40% of the controls without visible rosacea (as recorded in previous studies), raises questions about the role of
these bacteria as atrigger of the post-steroid rosacea inflammatory process.4 B. cereus is a Gram-positive, aerobic-to-facultative, spore-
forming rod widely distributed environmentally, bearing close phenotypic and genetic (16S rRNA) links to several other Bacillus species,
especially B. anthracis.5 One reservoir for B. cereus is the intestinal tract of invertebrates. It has been observed in the guts of certain
arthropods which is regarded as the normal intestinal stage in soil-dwelling insects attached to the arthropod intestinal epithelium, where
they sporulate. 6,7 In the food industry, B. cereus spores are particularly troublesome because spores can be refractory to pasteurization
and gamma radiation, while their hydrophobic nature allows them to adhere to surfaces.8 B. cereus spores may colonize skin on the hands and
feet, which are often in contact with the environment through microscopic skin abrasions.The pathogenicity of B. cereus is intimately
associated with tissue-destructive or reactive exoenzyme production: four hemolysins, three phospholipases, one emesis-inducing toxin, and
three enterotoxins: hemolysin BL (HBL), nonhemolytic enterotoxin (NHE) and cytotoxin K.9 In 2008,Dohmae et al. described a B. cereus
nosocomial infection from reused towels in Japan.10 This study focused on the correlation between D. folliculorum and types of Bacillus
species.The low density of Demodex species in the patients included in the study could explain the lack of identification of B. oleronius
culture, which may underline the difference of microbiome between typical rosacea and TSIFRD. In a series of 75 patients with topical
steroid-induced facial rosaceiform dermatitis (TSIFRD), 15 had clinical spinulosis, 14 had dermoscopic features of D. folliculorum -
follicular plugs, Demodex tails confirmed by scraping, microscopy and histopathology. Eight out of 15 patients had D. folliculorum, and one
case revealed associations with positive B. cereus cultures; while no B. oleronius was isolated. These results show a possible difference
between the microbiome found in TSIFRD and previously reported data on microbiome in rosacea. Larger studies are needed to confirm
correlations between Demodex and Bacillus species in different forms of rosacea and their implication in the inflammatory process.q Conflict
of interest: none Financial Support: Acknowledgements: This paper is supported by the Sectoral Operational Programme Human Resources
Development(SOP HRD),financed by the European Social Fund and by the Romanian Government under the contract POSDRU/159/1.5/S/137390/ Work
performed at the University Dunarea de Jos, Faculty of Medicine and Pharmacy; Central Reference Laboratory Synevo, University of Medicine
and Pharmacy Carol Davila – Bucharest, Romania.
