Non-steroidal, anti-inflammatory drugs, followed by antibiotics, are the main causes of fixed drug eruption. They provoke one or several
round erythematous or bullous lesions that recur in the same place after taking the causative medication. A positive patch test on residual,
lesional skin can replace satisfactorily oral reintroduction. We describe the case of a 74-year-old woman with numerous, rounded,
erythematous lesions on the trunk and recurrent blistering on the fifth right-hand finger, which developed a few hours after taking
etoricoxib. Lesional patch testing with etoricoxib was positive and reproduced the typical pattern of a fixed drug eruption upon
histopathology. We emphasize the specific reactivity of the etoricoxib patch test, and the capacity to reproduce the histologic pattern of
the reaction. Fixed drug eruption (FDE) is a cutaneous adverse drug reaction characterized by one or multiple skin lesions that begin one to
two weeks after the first exposure to the drug. These lesions present as erythematous and edematous round plaques, sometimes with a central
blister. They can be found anywhere on the body but favor the oral mucosa, lips and genitalia. With subsequent exposures, lesions reactivate
within 24 hours and then fade several days, often leaving a residual, post-inflammatory, grey-brown pigmentation. After a further
administration of the culprit drug, lesions appear at the same locations but may also emerge at new locations. In the presence of numerous
lesions, it is termed generalized FDE and may be difficult to differentiate from erythema multiforme major, Stevens-Johnson Syndrome and
toxic epidermal necrolysis, with which it shares histopathological findings.1 The drugs most frequently associated with FDE are non-steroid,
anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), followed by antibiotics.2 Oral drug rechallenge is considered the gold standard diagnostic test, but even
with low doses, the culprit drug may cause simultaneous reactivation of all lesions and create new ones, which is impracticable in patients
with numerous bullous lesions. Alternatively, patch testing on a previously involved site may be the preferred test,3, especially in cases
induced by NSAIDs.3 Patch testing should be performed six weeks after the acute eruption, with lesions in remission. The culprit drug and
related drugs (if possible) are applied under occlusion for 24 hours in test chambers or in open tests, in both non-lesional skin on the
back and in previously involved areas. Readings should be performed 24 and 48 hours thereafter. The test is considered positive if there is
erythema and pruritus, infiltration or more intense reactions.3,4,5 In highly suspicious cases entailing negative patch tests, it is
advisable to repeat the patch test on the affected area with the suspected allergen at the same or higher concentrations (up to 20%), under
occlusion. If tests remain negative, oral rechallenge under strict surveillance is an option. Rechallenge tests are considered positive if
recurrence of inflammatory signs in residual lesions occurs within the following 24hours.4,5,6 We report the case of a 74-year-old female
patient who regularly consumed multiple drugs, with no previous adverse reactions. She was observed in the emergency room for a violaceous
plaque of 5cm in diameter with central blistering on the medial side of the fifth right-hand finger, as well as multiple, smaller, round
erythematous lesions on the upper back and lateral side of the arms. These skin lesions appeared less than 12 hours after taking etoricoxib
(Exxiv®) for joint pain. The patient described a similar episode two months beforehand, involving only the right-hand finger. She was
treated with betamethasone cream and fusidic acid, leading to clinical improvement. Six weeks later, with the cutaneous reaction in
remission and some residual macular pigmented lesions, patch testing was performed, applying the allergens from the European baseline series
and a series of 12 NSAIDs on non-lesional skin, involving occlusion for 48 hours in Finn Chambers. Additionally, in ill-defined residual
hyperpigmented areas (two on the upper back, and one on the right-hand finger), we applied etoricoxib 10% in vaseline using Finn chambers
with occlusion periods of 24 hours. As we did not have pure etoricoxib, an Exxiv® 90mg pill was grinded into fine powder and manipulated in
vaseline to obtain a 10% concentration of the active drug. Readings performed after 24 hours revealed a positive reaction to etoricoxib only
in previously involved areas (Figures 1 and 2). No positive reaction to celecoxib (Celebrex®) 10% was observed in lesional or normal skin.
Figure 1 Positive patch test at 24 hours with erythema and infiltration of the patch test area on residual lesions, and negative patch test
when performed on non-involved skin (red arrow) Positive patch test at 24 hours with erythema and infiltration of the patch test area on
residual lesions, and negative patch test when performed on non-involved skin (red arrow) Figure 2 Highlight of reactivation of the skin
lesion in the fifth right-hand finger after contact test Highlight of reactivation of the skin lesion in the fifth right-hand finger after
contact test A cutaneous biopsy in a positive test area located on the upper back at 24 hours revealed spongiosis, lymphocyte exocytosis and
marked vacuolization of the basal cell layer, with some apoptotic keratinocytes, associated with a lymphocytic dermal infiltrate, with some
intravascular neutrophils, consistent with the diagnosis of FDE (Figure 3). Figure 3 Dermal infiltrate, with some intravascular neutrophils
at a lower magnification. Spongiosis and lymphocytic exocytosis with vacuolization of the basal cell layer as well as apoptotic
keratinocytes, at a higher magnification Dermal infiltrate, with some intravascular neutrophils at a lower magnification. Spongiosis and
lymphocytic exocytosis with vacuolization of the basal cell layer as well as apoptotic keratinocytes, at a higher magnification We present
the case of a polymedicated, elderly patient with etoricoxib-induced FDE. Diagnosis was based on the typical clinical presentation and
confirmed by a positive lesional patch test that reproduced the typical histopathology of FDE. Etoricoxib is a newly developed NSAID, a
cyclo-oxygenase 2 selective inhibitor, rarely described as the culprit drug in FDE, which makes this a peculiar case.7 In agreement with
previous studies, patch testing on lesional skin was useful to confirm etoricoxib as the culprit drug in this FDE case.7,2 It should be
highlighted that patch testing must be performed on residual lesional areas, where epidermal CD8+ memory T lymphocytes are retained for many
years6. This explains the exclusive reactivity of these locations facing oral rechallenge and probably facilitates reactivation after
cutaneous exposure due to patch testing.2,5,7 Histologically, after oral reactivation, there is a lichenoid reaction with pigment
incontinence; in more exuberant lesions, there is a significant hydropic degeneration of basal cells with dyskeratotic cells in the
epidermis, a dermal lymphocytic infiltrate and dermal melanophages.7,5,4 Similar features were observed in our patient's positive lesional
patch test, demonstrating that in cutaneous adverse drug reactions, the histology of patch tests can reproduce many aspects of the acute
reaction.8 Since the presence or absence of cross-reactions can also be evaluated by lesional patch testing, these data can be important in
recommending alternative safe drugs. In FDE induced by etoricoxib, patients can safely use the other coxib with a different chemical
structure. The absence of cross-reactivity with celecoxib has also been confirmed by lesional patch testing, as in our case (Figure 4).2,7,9
Figure 4 Etoricoxib and Celecoxib chemical structure Etoricoxib and Celecoxib chemical structure With an aging population, the growing
consumption of medication and the commercialization of new drugs by the pharmaceutical industry, there is an increased incidence in adverse
cutaneous drug reactions. Etiologic confirmation of FDE is sometimes hard, particularly in polymedicated patients. After identification of
the culprit drug, patients should be given a list of drugs to avoid, to prevent new and more severe episodes of cutaneous adverse drug
reactions.10 Conflict of Interest: None Financial Support: None Work performed at the Hospital Universitário de Coimbra – Coimbra, Portugal.
