Authors’ Contribution: Study Design Data Collection Statistical Analysis Data Interpretation Manuscript Preparation Literature Search Funds
Collection Conflict of interest: None declared Case series Patients: Male, 48 • Male, 60 • Male, 63 • Male, 69 • Male, 68 • Female, 63 Final
Diagnosis: Esophageal cancer Symptoms: None Medication: — Clinical Procedure: — Specialty: Oncology Rare disease Patients with esophageal
achalasia are considered to be a high-risk group for esophageal carcinoma, and it has been reported that this cancer often arises at a long
interval after surgery for achalasia. However, it is unclear whether esophageal carcinoma is frequent when achalasia has been treated
successfully and the patient is without dysphagia. In this study, we reviewed patients with esophageal carcinoma who were detected by
regular follow-up after surgical treatment of achalasia. Esophageal cancer was detected by periodic upper GI endoscopy in 6 patients. Most
of them had early cancers that were treated by endoscopic resection. All 6 patients had undergone surgery for achalasia and the outcome had
been rated as excellent or good. Annual follow-up endoscopy was done and the average duration of follow-up until cancer was seen after
surgery was 14.3 years (range: 5 to 40 years). Five patients had early cancer. Four cases had multiple lesions. In conclusion, surgery for
achalasia usually improves passage symptoms, but esophageal cancer still arises in some cases and the number of tumors occurring many years
later is not negligible. Accordingly, long-term endoscopic follow-up is needed for detection of malignancy at an early stage. Patients with
esophageal achalasia are considered to be a high-risk group for esophageal carcinoma, and it has been reported that this cancer often arises
at a long interval after surgery for achalasia . However, it is unclear whether esophageal carcinoma is frequent when achalasia has been
treated successfully and the patient is without dysphagia. In this study, we reviewed patients with esophageal carcinoma who were detected
by regular endoscopic follow-up after surgical treatment of achalasia. Thirty-two patients who were treated for esophageal achalasia at our
hospital were underwent long-term and periodic upper GI endoscopic follow-up. The mean follow-up period was 11.1 years (range 1 to 40 years)
in these 32 patients. Esophageal squamous cell carcinoma was detected by periodic upper GI endoscopy in 6 patients and the incidence of
esophageal cancer was 18%. All 6 patients had undergone surgery for achalasia and the outcome had been rated as excellent or good . Annual
follow-up endoscopy was done and the average duration of follow-up until cancer was seen after surgery was 14.3 years (range: 5 to 40
years). Five patients had early cancer (pT1a-EP∼MM) and the tumor type was 0-IIc or 0-IIb, and 1 had T2 cancer and type was 0-Is (Table 1).
The patient was a 48-year-old man. The Heller-Dor operation was done for Grade II achalasia and an excellent outcome was achieved according
to Payne’s criteria . Endoscopic follow-up was performed annually and a 0–IIb lesion was detected in the lower esophagus at 5 years after
surgery. EMR was performed. Subsequently, there has been no recurrence or metachronous cancer. Pathological findings: The depth of tumor
invasion was T1a-EP (Tis) with ly0 and v0. Thickening of the epithelium and an increase of blood vessels in the mucosal or submucosal layers
were seen. The patient was a 60-year-old man. The Heller-Dor operation was performed for Grade II achalasia when he was 36 years old and
postoperative outcome was judged to be excellent. Six years later, 0–IIc early cancer was diagnosed by annual follow-up endoscopy. This was
treated with chemoradiation and the lesion showed a complete response. Follow-up endoscopy was continued, and another 0–IIc early cancer was
detected in the lower esophagus at 24 years after the operation for achalasia. We diagnosed metachronous multiple esophageal cancer and
performed ESD to remove the lesion. Pathological findings revealed the depth of tumor invasion was T1a-EP (Tis) with ly0 and v0. There was
epithelial thickening, as well as cellular infiltration and scarring of the mucosal and submucosal layers. The patient was a 63-year-old
man. Gastric patch surgery was done for Grade II achalasia 39 years previously. Because dysphagia occurred again at 25 years after the first
operation, the Heller-Dor operation was performed. The outcome was excellent and this status was maintained. Follow-up endoscopy was done
every year. Forty years after his first operation, synchronous esophageal cancers were detected in the middle and lower esophagus by annual
endoscopy. The lesions were diagnosed as early cancer, and ESD was performed. Pathological findings: The depth of invasion was T1a-MM (ly0
and v0) for lesion 1 and T1a-LPM (ly0 and v0) for lesion 2. Thickening of the epithelium and increased vascularity of the mucosal or
submucosal layer were seen at the sites of both lesions. The patient was a 69-year-old man. The Heller-Dor operation was performed for Grade
II achalasia when he was 42 years old and postoperative outcome was judged to be good. Twenty-seven years later, 0-Is cancer and 0–IIc early
cancer was diagnosed in the middle and lower esophagus by annual follow-up endoscopy (Figure 1A–1D). This was treated with esophagectomy.
Pathological findings revealed the depth of tumors invasion were T2 and T1a-EP (Tis) with ly0 and v0. There was epithelial thickening, as
well as cellular infiltration and scarring of the mucosal and submucosal layers (Figure 2A, 2B). The patient was a 68-year-old man. Fundic
patch surgery was done for Grade II achalasia 45. The outcome was excellent and this status was maintained. Follow-up endoscopy was done
every year. Twenty-three years after the operation, synchronous esophageal cancers were detected in the middle and lower esophagus by annual
endoscopy. The lesions were diagnosed as early cancer, and ESD was performed. Pathological findings showed that the depth of invasion was
T1a-EP (ly0 and v0) for all lesions. Thickening of the epithelium and increased vascularity of the mucosal or submucosal layer were seen at
the sites of both lesions. The patient was a 63-year-old woman. The Heller-Dor operation was performed for Grade I achalasia when she was 49
years old and postoperative outcome was judged to be excellent. Fourteen years later, 0–IIc early cancer was diagnosed in the middle
esophagus by annual follow-up endoscopy (Figure 3A–3C). This was treated with ESD. Pathological findings showed that the depth of tumors
invasion were T1a-EP (Tis) with ly0 and v0. There was epithelial thickening, as well as cellular infiltration and scarring of the mucosal
and submucosal layers (Figure 4). In patients with esophageal achalasia, esophageal carcinoma occurs at a high frequency, so we need to be
aware of the risk of this cancer when performing treatment and follow-up of achalasia. The prevalence of esophageal cancer was 18% among of
our follow-up patients. In previous reports, the prevalence of esophageal cancer has ranged from 2.3 to 9.2% , and it has been reported that
the incidence rate of this cancer is high during follow-up after treatment for achalasia. There have been few reports on the results of
follow-up after curative surgery for achalasia. It was reported that the frequency of esophageal cancer decreases after surgery for
achalasia , but it was also reported that incidence of this cancer after surgery was 2.9% . Therefore, we consider that surgery for
achalasia does not necessarily decrease the risk of esophageal cancer. Chino et al. reviewed a series of reports and concluded that it takes
17–21.5 years for occurrence of esophageal cancer after the onset of achalasia symptoms. Arima et al. reported that 15.1 years elapsed until
the occur-rence of esophageal cancer after surgery for achalasia, while Leeuwenburgh et al. found cancer at 11 years after the operation.
These reports indicate that esophageal cancer can occur many years after the initial detection or treatment of achalasia. The Heller-Dor
operation has been the standard surgical treatment for achalasia at our hospital since 1985, and we attempt esophageal preservation before
performing esophagectomy in patients with advanced achalasia . Good results have been reported for this procedure. Bonavina et al. studied
the results of the Heller-Dor operation and found that the outcome was excellent-to-good in 92.8% by Payne’s criteria . Similarly, over 90%
of patients had an excellent outcome at our hospital. Thus, few patients complain of passage symptoms after surgery, and all of our patients
who developed esophageal cancer after achalasia surgery had an excellent result by Payne’s criteria. This suggests that the potential for
malignant transformation persists even after surgery improves passage symptoms. Because we performed regular follow-up endos-copy, the
cancer was detected at an early stage in all of our patients. This suggests that surveillance by follow-up endos-copy to detect esophageal
cancer is an important aspect of postoperative management for achalasia. Three of these 6 patients were chronic alcohol drinkers and 3 of
them had a smoking habit, and it is reasonable to assume that there was some influence of these living habits on the occurrence of
esophageal cancer in these patients. Surgery for achalasia usually improves passage symptoms. After surgery, esophageal cancer arose in some
cases, with a number of tumors occurring many years later. Accordingly, long-term endoscopic follow-up is useful for detection of malignancy
at an early stage. (A) Case 4. Conventional endoscopy shows a protruding lesion (0–Is) located 37 cm from the incisors (lesion 1). (B) There
are few brownish areas at the lesion on narrow-band imaging. (C) Case 4. Conventional endoscopy shows a flat lesion (0–IIb) located 30 cm
from the incisors. (D) There is a brownish area at the lesion on narrow-band imaging (lesion 2). (A) Case 4. Microscopic findings. Tumor
depth was T2, ly0, v0 for lesion (lesion 1). (B) T1a-LPM, ly0, v0 for lesion 2 (lesion 2). Epithelial thickening and increased vascularity
in the mucosal or submucosal layers were seen at both lesions. (A) Case 6. Endoscopic findings. Conventional endoscopy shows slightly
depressed lesion (0-IIc) at 29–30 cm from the incisor teeth. (B) Case 6. There is a brownish area at the lesion on narrow-band imaging. (C)
Case 6. Chromoendoscopy reveals that the lesion is not stained by iodine. Case 6. Pathological findings: The depth of tumors invasion were
T1a-EP (Tis) with ly0 and v0. There was epithelial thickening, as well as cellular infiltration and scarring of the mucosal and submucosal
layers. Clinical characteristics of the patients.
