Correspondence to Dr.　Masaru Ando, mando@oita-u.ac.jp Fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG)-positron emission tomography with computed tomography (FDG-
PET/CT) is useful in disease monitoring of malignancies after therapy, while an FDG uptake may also be present in benign diseases. We herein
demonstrate a case of disseminated Mycobacterium tuberculosis mimicking systemic metastasis of prostate cancer. This case highlights that
clinicians should consider Mycobacterium tuberculosis in patients with prostate cancer who demonstrate multifocal FDG uptakes masquerading
as metastasis, even when the chest photographs reveal a normal appearance and a sputum examination demonstrates negative results. An
invasive surgical biopsy may be required and a pathological analysis would be critical in the diagnosis of Mycobacterium tuberculosis.
Mycobacterium tuberculosis involving any site may produce systemic symptoms. The frequency of a fever ranges from 37-80% and loss of
appetite, weight loss, weakness, night sweats, and malaise are also common, although there are some asymptomatic patients as well. The main
difficulty with extrapulmonary specimens is that they yield very few bacilli and consequently are associated with a low sensitivity on acid-
fast bacillus (AFB) smears and cultures. If the analysis for tuberculosis is negative in the sputum, gastric secretion and urine, then
sampling by a surgical biopsy or needle aspiration are mandatory for the diagnosis. Fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG)-positron emission tomography
with computed tomography (PET/CT) is useful for diagnosing and staging primary tumors, detecting locally recurrent and/or metastatic
disease, assessing the extent of metabolically active castrate-resistant disease, monitoring treatment responses and in prognosticating. On
the other hand, its contribution to the diagnosis of a fever of unknown origin, inflammatory conditions and occult infections is
increasingly reported. Thus, physicians should pay careful attention to the assessment of an intense FDG accumulation at the time of
diagnosis or during the course of treatment. We herein demonstrate a case of disseminated Mycobacterium tuberculosis mimicking systemic
metastasis during the treatment course after heavy ion radiotherapy for prostate cancer. A 71-year-old man was referred to our institution
to investigate FDG-PET/CT results with multifocal 18-fluorodeoxyglucose (18F-FDG) uptakes. He was diagnosed with prostate cancer (T2aN0M0)
and treated with bicalutamide, a non-steroidal androgen receptor inhibitor, for 12 months with sequential heavy ion radiotherapy. Two months
after radiotherapy, FDG-PET/CT demonstrated multifocal intense FDG accumulations in supraclavicular and mediastinum lymphadenopathies, the
liver, lung, rib and vertebral columns (Fig. 1a). He had a slight visual disturbance due to glaucoma and was an ex-smoker. Regarding his
family history, his mother and grandmother had suffered from tuberculosis although the patient had not been previously diagnosed with
tuberculosis. (a) FDG-PET/CT showed multifocal uptake lesions of supraclavicular and mediastinal lymphadenopathies, right lobe of the liver,
right lower lobe of the lung, third right rib, fourth lumbar vertebra and prostate (supraclavicular lymph node: maximum standardized uptake
value (mSUV) 9.85, supramediastinal lymph node: mSUV 4.73, paraaortic lymph node: mSUV 6.31, subcarinal lymph node: mSUV 12.31, right lobe
of liver: mSUV 6.23, right lower field of the lung: mSUV 4.54, third right rib: mSUV 2.04, the fourth lumbar vertebra: mSUV 2.64, and
prostate: mSUV 7.2). (b) Conventional CT showed infiltrations on S7 and subcarinal lymph node swelling (arrow). (c) Follow-up FDG-PET/CT one
year after antibiotic treatment showed an improvement in the multifocal intensity lesions, confirming the efficiency of antituberculosis
therapy. (d) Follow-up CT showed an improvement in the lung fields and subcarinal lymphadenopathy (arrow). On a physical examination, he was
afebrile, with a regular pulse of 64 beats/min and blood pressure of 103/63 mmHg. A complete blood count (CBC) showed a leukocyte count of
4,960 /μL with 45.9 % neutrophils and 28.5% lymphocytes (normal range: 20-44%). A blood chemistry analysis showed an aspartate
aminotransferase (AST) level of 15.3 IU/L (normal range: 13-33 IU/L), alanine aminotransferase (ALT) level of 15.1 IU/L (normal range: 8-42
IU/L), lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) level of 213 IU/L (normal range: 124- 222 IU/L), albumin level of 3.9 g/dL (normal range: 3.0-4.9 mg/dL),
C-reactive protein (CRP) level of 0.05 mg/dL (normal range: <0.25 mg/dL), ACE level of 16.3 U/L (normal range: 7-25 U/L), lysozyme level of
7.4 μg/mL (normal range: 5-10 μg/mL) and sIL-2R level of 529 U/mL (normal range: 127-582 U/mL). Prostate-specific antigen (PSA) decreased to
0.02 ng/mL (normal range: <4.0 ng/mL) although it was 12.78 ng/mL before starting treatment for prostate cancer. A sputum examination
demonstrated negative results from an AFB smear and polymerase chain reaction (PCR) for Mycobacterium species, while an interferon-gamma
release assay (IGRA) showed a positive result and a purified protein derivative (PPD) skin test was strongly positive. A chest radiograph
showed no abnormalities. Chest CT showed infiltrations on S1 and S7 and multiple lymphadenopathies of the right supraclavicular, para-aortic
and mediastinum lymph nodes (Fig. 1b). At this time, the differential diagnosis included metastasis of prostate cancer or other type of
malignancy, sarcoidosis, tuberculosis and malignant lymphoma. The specimens obtained from a transbronchial lung biopsy (TBLB) pathologically
showed non-caseous epithelioid granulomas and Mycobacterium was not detected by the AFB smear, culture or PCR. Additionally, a
bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF) analysis demonstrated a mild increase in the lymphocyte profile (28.3%) and an increase in the CD4/8
ratio (7.69). The specimens obtained from endobronchial ultrasound-guided transbronchial needle aspiration (EBUS-TBNA) showed non-caseous
epithelioid granulomas and the AFB smear and PCR for Mycobacterium tuberculosis were negative. At this time, sarcoidosis was suspected,
however, the patient's PSA level was normal and the PPD skin test and IGRA were both positive. These findings allowed us to rule out any
other diagnosis, such as a sarcoid-like reaction due to a malignancy or mycobacterial infection, thus a surgical supraclavicular lymph node
biopsy was subsequently performed. The biopsy specimen showed granulomatous inflammation with caseous necrosis and multinucleated giant
cells, which was consistent with a mycobacterial infection and no evidence of malignancy (Fig. 2). Consequently, the patient was diagnosed
with disseminated Mycobacterium tuberculosis infection. Hematoxylin and Eosin staining specimens. The supraclavicular lymph node biopsy
showed granulomatous inflammation with caseous necrosis and multinucleated giant cells. Magnification: 100×. The patient was initially
started on isoniazid 300 mg daily, rifampicin 600 mg daily, ethambutol 750 mg daily and pyrazinamide 1,500 mg daily for two months, followed
by isoniazid 300 mg daily and rifampicin 600 mg daily for seven months. Follow-up CT showed an improvement in the pulmonary infiltrations
and lymphadenopathies and FDG-PET/CT showed a significantly decreased intensity of the multifocal lesions detected prior to treatment (Fig.
1c and d). The incidence rate of prostate carcinoma is 11.4% and it is the fourth most prevalent cancer in Japanese men (1). According to
the analysis of an autopsy series, lymph nodes, bones, lung and liver are the most frequent metastatic sites of prostate carcinoma (2). FDG-
PET/CT provides fused images that demonstrate the complementary roles of functional and anatomic assessments in the diagnosis of carcinoma
recurrence through the precise localization of suspected 18F-FDG foci and their characterization as malignant or benign. However, FDG is not
a cancer-specific agent, and false positive findings in benign disease have been reported. Infectious diseases (e.g., mycobacterial, fungal,
and bacterial infection), sarcoidosis, radiation pneumonitis and postoperative surgical conditions have shown intense uptakes on PET scans.
We herein demonstrated a case of multifocal intense 18F-FDG accumulations related to tuberculosis mimicking recurrent prostate cancer after
heavy ion radiotherapy. The serum level of PSA is useful for monitoring the disease activity of prostate carcinoma despite its limited
sensitivity (PSA levels might be undetectable or low in some cases of disseminated disease) and specificity (high levels are occasionally
associated with benign disease). FDG-PET/CT has shown the ability to assess disease progression along all known routes of prostate cancer
recurrence, although the likelihood of tumor detection may be related to the PSA level (3). Tuberculoma is one of the most well-known
diseases that show an intense FDG uptake. Active granulomatous processes have been reported to accumulate FDG, in which active inflammatory
cells have markedly increased glycolysis and the hexose monophosphate shunt is stimulated by phagocytosis, which increases approximately
20-30 times the baseline values, leading to a high FDG uptake (4). However, the uptake rates of 18F-FDG and 11C-choline may be useful for
differentiation. The uptake of 11C-choline is linked to an increase in cell membrane synthesis and tumor cell proliferation. If the lesion
size measures greater than 1.5 cm, then the SUV of 18F-FDG is very high and that of 11C-choline is relatively high in lung cancer, while the
former is relative high and the latter is low in tuberculosis. If the lesion size measures less than 1.5 cm, then the difference is not as
apparent (5). This procedure may help to differentiate tuberculous granuloma from lung cancer, however, a prospective study is necessary.
Tuberculosis should be considered in the differential diagnosis when a patient has positive results for the IGRA and PPD skin test and a
history of previous tuberculosis contact. In the present case, the specimens obtained by TBLB and TBNA demonstrated epithelioid granuloma,
however, the AFB smear, culture and PCR analysis showed negative results. Consequently, the surgical cervical lymph node biopsy specimens
demonstrated granulomatous inflammation with caseous necrosis and multinucleated giant cells consistent with a mycobacterial infection,
although the AFB smear, culture and PCR analysis at this time were also negative. The diagnosis of tuberculosis involving the lymph nodes or
sinus tract is based on three or more of the following criteria: (i) cervical mass or draining sinus; (ii) skin sensitivity to purified
protein derivative S (PPD-S); (iii) compatible histopathological appearance of biopsied tissue, usual caseous granuloma; (iv) demonstration
of AFB on biopsy specimens; (v) growth of Mycobacterium tuberculosis from the biopsy specimen or aspirated pus, and (vi) a definite response
to specific antituberculosis chemotherapy (6). The present case demonstrated at least four out of six criteria described above, thus
fulfilled the diagnose criteria of tuberculous cervical lymphangitis. The diagnosis of extrapulmonary tuberculosis is difficult due to very
few bacilli cultured from the specimens; the lack of adequate sample amounts or volumes; the apportioning of the sample for various
diagnosis tests, such as histology/cytology, a biochemical analysis, microbiology and PCR; and the presence of inhibitors that undermine the
performance of nucleic acid amplification-based techniques that are universally applicable for all types of extrapulmonary samples (7).
Thus, the pathological analysis is crucial for the diagnosis of extrapulmonary tuberculosis. The incidence of late gastrointestinal and
genitourinary morbidities has been shown to be due to adverse reactions of heavy ion radiotherapy for prostate cancer, while that of
Mycobacterium tuberculosis infection has not yet been elucidated. Classically, pulmonary tuberculosis can be divided into a primary and a
post-primary pattern, each presenting with characteristic radiological features. On radiology, primary tuberculosis manifests as four main
entities, parenchymal disease, lymphadenopathy, pleural effusion and miliary disease, while post-primary tuberculosis manifests as
parenchymal disease, airway involvement, and pleural effusion. The distinguishing features of post-primary tuberculosis include a
predilection of the upper lobes, the absence of lymphadenopathy and cavitation (4,8). Therefore the present case may be recognized as
primary tuberculosis according to the radiographic findings. Primary tuberculosis may progress, thereby causing disseminated tuberculosis,
especially in very young patients or immunosuppressed individuals. Radiation therapy has been shown to alter the immune system by changing
the number, balance and interaction of immune cells, which are essential for protection against tuberculosis. Although, a previous case
report showed reactive tuberculosis following local radiation therapy for prostate cancer (9), to the best of our knowledge, the present
case is the first case report to demonstrate Mycobacterium tuberculosis following local heavy ion therapy for prostate cancer. In order to
discuss the relationship between the incidence of Mycobacterium tuberculosis infection and heavy ion radiotherapy, a further accumulation of
cases treated with heavy ion radiotherapy is necessary. In the present case we had to rule out sarcoidosis because of the presence of non-
caseous granuloma in the specimens obtained from TBLB and EBUS-TBNA and an increase in lymphocyte profile and CD4/8 ratio. A meta-analysis
indicated that almost 30% of all patients with sarcoidosis demonstrated the presence of mycobacterial nucleic acids within the lesions (10).
In addition, Chen et al. identified a specific Mycobacterium protein, the catalase-peroxidase protein (mKatG) in 55% of sarcoidosis tissues
using a proteomic approach, mKatG may show a T-cell response which leads to formation of granulomas (11). The non-caseous granulomatous
lesions in the present case may represent a sarcoid-like reaction due to the Mycobacterium antigens. Because it is very rare that
tuberculosis and sarcoidosis occur concomitantly (12-14) and the IGRA and PPD skin test demonstrated positive results in the present case,
explanation for why the AFB smear, culture and PCR for Mycobacterium tuberculosis were negative may be due to the fact that the bacilli were
either small in number or absent in the specimens. As a result, mycobacterial involvement in sarcoid pathogenesis remains controversial. We
conducted a search using the PubMed database and 11 cases with Mycobacterium tuberculosis masquerading as metastasis or recurrence of
malignancy revealed by multifocal FDG uptakes on FDG-PET/CT were identified, including the present case (15-21). There was no information
regarding the source of primary carcinoma or the period between the onset and diagnosis of malignancy. The incidence of tuberculosis was not
related to whether any type of chemotherapy was administered. Interestingly, an intense FDG uptake in the lung fields was found in only one
case, whereas the uptake in lymph nodes tended to be more frequently observed (Table). Considering that most of the cases were diagnosed
with extrapulmonary tuberculosis, an analysis of a standard sputum examination may not be helpful for the diagnosis of tuberculosis.
Sunnetcioglu et al reported that the main diagnostic modalities for pulmonary tuberculosis were a sputum/smear analysis (72.7%), clinical-
radiological data (21.7%) and a biopsy (6.1%), while a biopsy (71.5%), a sputum/fluid analysis (18.5%) and clinical-radiological data (4.9%)
were used to confirm extrapulmonary tuberculosis (22). To clarify suspected recurrence or metastasis of malignancy, invasive surgical
biopsies and pathological examinations are required in the diagnosis of intense FDG uptake lesions on FDG-PET/CT. Characteristics of
Patients Diagnosed with Mycobacterium tuberculosis Mimicking Recurrence of Metastasis of Malignancy on FDG-PET/CT. In conclusion, we should
keep Mycobacterium tuberculosis infection in mind in the differential diagnosis, except in the case of recurrence and/or metastasis, when an
elevated FDG uptake on FDG-PET/CT is demonstrated in patients with prostate cancer at the diagnosis and/or follow-up period. A sputum
examination may not necessarily be helpful in the diagnosis, however, histopathological examinations are critical; thus, invasive surgical
biopsies may be required. We thank Dr. T. Daa, Department of Diagnostic Pathology, Faculty of Medicine, Oita University for valuable
assistance in the pulmonary histopathological record.
