Correspondence to Dr.　Nobuaki Tsuyama, leibniz.genius@gmail.com We herein present a case of acquired hemophilia A with a normal activated
partial thromboplastin (aPTT), intramuscular hematoma and cerebral hemorrhage occurring in a 73-year-old man. The patient visited our
emergency department with gait disturbance, pain and swelling in his right leg. Computed tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging
(MRI) revealed intramuscular hematoma and intracranial hemorrhage. The results of initial coagulation studies were normal, but repeated
coagulation studies revealed an isolated prolongation of the aPTT. Additional laboratory tests confirmed the diagnosis of acquired
hemophilia A. If the initial aPTT is normal, we should therefore repeat the aPTT and also perform other coagulation studies including a
mixing study, factor VIII level and inhibitor, to investigate the underlying diseases in elderly patients with spontaneous hemorrhaging of
unknown etiology. Acquired hemophilia A is a rare but potentially life-threating bleeding disorder that is caused by autoantibodies against
factor VIII. Acquired hemophilia A is usually suspected in patients with an isolated prolongation of the activated partial thromboplastin
time (aPTT). We herein present a case of acquired hemophilia A with a normal aPTT, intramuscular hematoma and cerebral hemorrhage. A
73-year-old man with a history of hypertension, gastric cancer and abdominal aortic aneurysm visited our emergency department complaining of
gait disturbance, pain and swelling in his right leg. His leg had become swollen five days ago and he was not able to walk smoothly. He had
not experienced any trauma or fever and had not undergone an operation in the past month. On examination, his blood pressure was 162/81
mmHg, heart rate was 81 beats per minute and body temperature was 36.4℃. His right thigh demonstrated tender swelling, and the neurological
findings revealed a shot-stepped gait without any paralysis or sensory disturbance. Laboratory test results revealed a hemoglobin level of
10.4 g/dL (normal, 13.2-17.2 g/dL), hematocrit of 30.4% (normal, 40.4-51.1%), a von Willebrand factor activity of 203% (normal, 60-170%),
elevated fibrinogen of 569 mg/dL (normal, 200-400 mg/dL) and elevated D-dimer level of 1.5 μg/mL (normal, 0.0-1.0 μg/mL). His aPTT level of
34.7 seconds (normal, 26.9-38.1 seconds) was normal, while the prothrombin time international normalized ratio, platelet count and liver
function were also within the normal ranges. A computed tomography (CT) scan demonstrated intramuscular hematoma in his right thigh (Fig.
1). The CT also demonstrated no recurrence of gastric cancer, and no new expansion and false lumen enhancement of the abdominal aorta. He
had not experienced any previous bleeding episodes, even during two previous surgeries (for gastric cancer and for an abdominal aortic
aneurysm), and he also had no family history of bleeding. Computed tomography scan showing an intramascular hematoma in the right thigh.
Four days later, head magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was performed for further evaluation of his gait disturbance. MRI showed an
intracranial hemorrhage, which was responsible for the gait disturbance (Fig. 2). We therefore repeated coagulation studies and detected an
isolated prolongation aPTT of 41.4 seconds. Additional laboratory studies including mixing studies, factor VIII and inhibitor titer were
ordered. Mixing studies showed no correction by incubating for 2 hours at 37℃ patient's plasma with equal volumes of normal plasma. The
results of other studies showed a factor VIII antibody with a titer of 1 Bethesda unit/mL (normal, 0 Bethesda units/mL) and decreased factor
VIII activity of 22.2% (normal, 50-150%). These results confirmed a diagnosis of acquired hemophilia A. Treatment with 40 mg oral prednisone
was initiated without any inhibitor bypassing agents, and no further bleeding episodes occurred. In response to the treatment, the aPTT
normalized, while the factor VIII activity was over 100%, and the factor VIII antibody was eradicated according to the level of Bethesda
units. T2-weighted fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) MRI showing a right thalamic hemorrhage. The course of the patient indicated
two important clinical issues. There is the possibility of a normal aPTT in the initial evaluation in a patient with acquired hemophilia A,
and acquired hemophilia A rarely causes life-threatening intracranial hemorrhage. Regarding the first issue, the diagnostic hallmark of
acquired hemophilia A is usually based on the detection of an isolated prolongation of the aPTT. Many algorithms for making a differential
diagnosis of acquired hemophilia A start from the isolated prolongation of the aPTT (1,2). However, a report from a quantitative case-based
survey of physicians across multiple specialties suggested that a prolonged aPTT may be overlooked even in actively bleeding patients,
especially when the aPTT is only slightly prolonged (3). Acquired hemophilia A with a minimally prolonged aPTT of 41.0 seconds has also been
reported (4). In our patient, the initial aPTT was normal (34.7 seconds) on admission, and a prolonged aPTT was detected for the first time
on the 4th day. We speculated that the reason for the normal aPTT at the initial evaluation was due to a low disease level with a titer of 1
for Bethesda units/mL. If we had not repeated the coagulation studies, we might not have diagnosed this potentially life-threating disorder.
This case is the first reported case of acquired hemophilia A with a normal aPTT at the initial evaluation. Regarding the second clinical
issue, most patients with acquired hemophilia A have hemorrhage in the skin, muscles or soft tissues (5), while intracranial hemorrhage is
rare (6). However, if it occurs, it sometimes leads to death (7,8). In our patient, we detected intracranial hemorrhage and made a diagnosis
of acquired hemophilia A before any life-threating events occurred. A delay in establishing a diagnosis for acquired hemophilia A can result
in severe bleeding and death, and we should therefore investigate the underlying diseases with spontaneous hemorrhage cases of unknown
cause, especially in elderly patients. In conclusion, in patients with acquired hemophilia A, there is the possibility of demonstrating a
normal aPTT at the initial evaluation, and life-threatening intracranial hemorrhage rarely occurs in patients with acquired hemophilia A. If
the initial aPTT is normal, we should nevertheless repeat coagulation studies and examine other coagulation studies including a mixing
study, factor VIII level and inhibitor to investigate the underlying diseases in elderly patients with a spontaneous hemorrhage of unknown
etiology. It is not uncommon to see bleeding symptoms in elderly patients in an emergency department. However, we are prone to attribute
these events to anticoagulation therapy, antiplatelet therapy or hepatic disorders. Our case suggested that we should conduct repeated
coagulation studies, in order to make a differential diagnosis of bleeding and also carry out adequate consultations with a hematologist.
