Correspondence to Dr.　Hiroki Isono, hirokisono@gmail.com Tetanus is a potentially fatal infection. Approximately 100 cases are reported in
Japan each year; however, little is known about its clinical course and outcomes in the current era of treatment. We herein report three
cases of tetanus in elderly patients who survived after mechanical ventilation and intensive care. These patients, together with six other
similar cases, had a median weaning period of 31 days and median length of stay of 77 days. In elderly patients, severe systemic forms of
tetanus require prolonged mechanical ventilation and hospitalization. To improve prevention, tetanus vaccination should be promoted more
aggressively among those who are susceptible to the disease. Tetanus is an infection caused by Clostridium tetani, a bacterium that is found
in the soil and which enters the body through skin wounds. After an incubation period of 7-10 days, the disease starts with focal symptoms,
such as spasmodic laughter, trismus, and dysphagia, and progresses to systemic symptoms, including respiratory failure and opisthotonus.
Severely affected patients may suffer the paralysis of the respiratory muscles and autonomic disturbances that ultimately lead to death (1).
Tetanus is more common in elderly patients than in younger individuals. In Japan, the tetanus vaccine has been available since 1953; the
diphtheria-tetanus-pertussis (DTP) vaccine was introduced for children in 1968 as a routine vaccination that is required by vaccination law
(2). At present, approximately 100 cases of tetanus occur each year; 94% of the patients are ≥40 years of age and 18% of the patients are
≥80 years of age (2). A previous study showed that the mortality rate had decreased from 43% to 15% after the introduction of the intensive
care unit (ICU) (3). In fact, the annual mortality rate in the past 10 years has been as low as 8% in Japan (4). However, little is known
about the prognosis of elderly patients who survive severe tetanus. It is therefore important to form an appropriate discharge plan for
tetanus patients who are treated in acute care hospitals. We therefore report three cases of tetanus in elderly patients who required
mechanical ventilation and prolonged hospitalization. Informed consent was obtained from each of the three patients for the publication of
this case report and the use of the accompanying images. This report was reviewed and approved by the research ethics committee of the
authors' institution. A previously healthy 85-year-old male farmer presented to our otolaryngology department with swallowing difficulty and
trismus without generalized muscle rigidity. He had no history of injury. He had never been immunized for tetanus. His laboratory data were
unremarkable. The possibility of deep neck infection was excluded by laryngeal endoscopy and contrast-enhanced computed tomography. Based on
these findings, he was clinically diagnosed with tetanus. He initially declined hospitalization and returned home; however, he returned to
our emergency department (ED) the next day due to the worsening of trismus. He was admitted to the ICU and required endotracheal intubation
due to the possibility that he may develop opisthotonus and respiratory failure. After 4 days, he was extubated because he did not develop
systemic symptoms. However, he was immediately reintubated on the same day as a result of expectoration difficulties and dysphagia. A
previously healthy 81-year-old male farmer was transferred to our ED by ambulance due to a 3-day history of progressively worsening trismus
and swallowing difficulty (Fig. 1A). The previous week, he had sustained an abrasion on his left arm while using pruning clippers (Fig. 1B).
He had never been immunized for tetanus. A physical examination revealed rigidity of the jaw and left upper extremity and muscle spasms of
the left upper arm. He was clinically diagnosed with tetanus and was admitted to the ICU, where he required endotracheal intubation. The
next day, his muscle spasms became aggravated due to opisthotonus after external stimuli. The clinical findings on admission in Case 2. A:
Trismus was observed. B: The abrasion on the patient’s upper extremity is shown. A previously healthy 91-year-old man was transferred to our
ED by ambulance because of new-onset speech difficulties, which he first noticed upon getting up in the morning. He had never been
vaccinated for tetanus. A physical examination revealed a puncture wound with redness and swelling on the dorsal side of the left hand,
which had occurred 1 week previously while pruning a garden tree (Fig. 2). He was alert but could not speak. Trismus and rigidity of the
neck and left arm were noted. He was clinically diagnosed with tetanus and was admitted to the ICU, where he required endotracheal
intubation. Opisthotonus developed the next day. The clinical findings on admission in Case 3. A puncture wound from a tree branch with a
small incision on the dorsal side of the left hand is shown. Redness and swelling are visible around the site of injury. On admission, all
of the patients received human tetanus immune globulin (HTIG) and tetanus toxoid. Propofol or midazolam was administered for sedation to
manage the patients' muscle spasms and fentanyl was administered for pain relief; muscle relaxants were not used. Case 3 had persistent
muscle spasms for 36 days and received magnesium sulfate for 3 days. Wound debridement was performed for the two patients who had a clear
source of infection (Fig. 1B and 2). All of the patients received antibiotics. Case 1 received penicillin G (4 million units, four times a
day for 10 days); Case 2 received penicillin G (4 million units, four times a day for 7 days); and Case 3 received ampicillin/sulbactam (3
g, four times a day for 7 days). In all cases, tracheostomy was performed within 2 weeks of admission. In addition, enteral nutrition and
heparin prophylaxis were administered as preventive measures against gastric ulcer and pressure sore formation, and physical therapy was
provided. Because of their prolonged critical illness, the patients experienced complications, including ventilator-associated pneumonia
(VAP), catheter-related bloodstream infection, and deep vein thrombosis. Autonomic dysfunction was observed in Case 3, with fluctuating
vital signs. Spasms were triggered, leading to the elevation of systolic blood pressure to >200 mmHg and a decrease in tidal volume.
Noradrenaline was also administered to treat his abnormally low blood pressure. Weaning and liberation from mechanical ventilatory support
were not feasible for this patient due to the weakness of his respiratory muscles. The weaning periods in Cases 1 and 2 were 60 and 18 days,
respectively; weaning was not achieved in Case 3. All three patients were eventually transferred out of the ICU. Despite the fact that these
patients had no underlying diseases and were independent in their activities of daily living (ADL) before admission, prolonged
hospitalization and rehabilitation were required to achieve a functional recovery. Case 1 remained in our hospital for 101 days. Case 2 was
hospitalized for 38 days, then transferred to a care facility, from which he was discharged on day 59. Case 3 remained at our hospital for
151 days but died in another hospital on day 204. The ADLs of the other two patients improved after they were discharged. The clinical
courses of these patients highlight two important points. First, patients with severe tetanus requiring mechanical ventilation need
prolonged mechanical ventilation (PMV) and hospitalization. Second, sufficient vaccination is important for preventing tetanus in elderly
individuals. In the present study, Case 1 continued to suffer from dysphagia and VAP, while Cases 2 and 3 continued to suffer muscle spasms,
which prolonged the period of bed rest and sedation. As a result, long-term rehabilitation was necessary due to the severe decline in the
patients' general condition after discharge from the ICU. Two patients were transferred to another facility for further rehabilitation. Six
cases of elderly patients (≥75 years of age) with tetanus who required mechanical ventilation have been reported in Japan (Table) (5-9). The
continuous variables were presented as median [interquartile range (IQR)]. When combined with the three cases of the present study, the
median weaning period, time to extubation and length of hospitalization (in the acute care hospital) were 31 days (18-41 days), 40 days
(25-62 days), and 77 days (60-90 days) respectively. One patient, who was not weaned from ventilatory support, was excluded from the
analysis of the weaning period and the time until extubation. Clinical Characteristics of Severe Tetanus Cases in the Elderly in Japan.
Cases 1, 2, and 3 are described in the present study. Cases 4–9 are from previous reports. ICU: intensive care unit, HTIG: human tetanus
immune globulin, VAP: ventilator-associated pneumonia, CRBSI: catheter related bloodstream infection, DVT: deep vein thrombosis A study in
the United States reported two cases of tetanus in patients of >90 years of age (10). Similarly to our cases, these patients required
mechanical ventilation for more than 3 weeks and spent more than 2 months in different medical facilities. The cost of hospitalization was
more than 200,000 USD for each patient (10). Severe tetanus in older adults requires PMV for 1 month and hospitalization for 2 months. PMV
is known to be associated with increased health care costs, morbidity, and mortality (11). It is important for intensivists to collaborate
with general physicians, physical therapists, social workers, and the family to achieve functional recovery and to plan for a smooth
discharge from the acute care hospital. In Japan, the overall annual incidence of tetanus was 0.98 cases/million in 2008, which was
approximately 10-fold of that in the United States (12,13). Furthermore, the incidence in the Japanese individuals of ≥80 years of age was
3.6 cases/million (4). We therefore wish to highlight the importance of preventing tetanus and its associated morbidities by achieving
sufficient vaccination coverage in older adults. The three patients in the present study had never been vaccinated against tetanus. A
worldwide study demonstrated the effectiveness of the vaccine by a decrease in the annual incidence of tetanus from approximately 110,000
cases in 1980 to around 9,600 cases in 2010 (14). Nevertheless, most Japanese adults of ≥50 years of age have no history of vaccination, and
their antibody levels remain at 30% (13). We should engage in efforts to enlighten the population with regard to tetanus vaccination. In
general, vaccination with tetanus toxoid is required three times. Routine vaccination with booster doses every 10 years is also recommended
(15). We believed that tetanus toxoid and HTIG should have been administered immediately after the onset of injury to patients with a
history of injury. Because tetanus can re-occur even among patients with a history of the disease, tetanus patients should be vaccinated
after treatment and discharge. In the present case report, one patient received a continuous intravenous infusion of magnesium sulfate to
treat muscle spasms. A meta-analysis showed that magnesium sulfate did not reduce mortality and that its effects on the total duration of
ICU stay or hospital stay were unclear (14). A randomized controlled study demonstrated that magnesium sulfate was effective in reducing the
use of other drugs but that it did not reduce the need for mechanical ventilation (16). Further research is needed to determine the role of
magnesium sulfate in the management of tetanus. In conclusion, although elderly patients with severe tetanus can be transferred out of the
ICU, they will probably require PMV and hospitalization for approximately 1 and 2 months, respectively, because of complications, including
severe deconditioning. Tetanus vaccination should therefore be promoted more aggressively among populations that are susceptible to the
disease: tetanus vaccination should be included in the primary vaccination series of adults who have never been vaccinated and a booster
should be administered every 10 years to those who have completed the primary series.
