Authors’ Contribution: Study Design Data Collection Statistical Analysis Data Interpretation Manuscript Preparation Literature Search Funds
Collection Conflict of interest: None declared Patient: Female, 63 Final Diagnosis: Cerebral amyloid angiopathy Symptoms: Altered mental
state • aphasia • hemiplegia Medication: — Clinical Procedure: — Specialty: Neurology Unusual clinical course Cerebral amyloid angiopathy
(CAA) is an increasingly recognized cause of lobar intracerebral hemorrhage (ICH) and cognitive impairment in the aging population. Magnetic
resonance imaging (MRI) of cerebral microbleeds is the most reliable option for clinical diagnosis of suspected CAA. The pathophysiology of
microbleeds and ICH in CAA is not well understood, but it is thought to be the result of vessel weakening and rupture secondary to amyloid
deposition. Little evidence has been established pertaining to the time course of recurrent CAA-related microbleeds or larger hemorrhages.
Although several risk factors have been associated with an increased risk of ICH in CAA, there are no current treatment guidelines for
recurrent hemorrhaging in CAA. We present a rare case of rapidly sequential and fatal lobar hemorrhaging in the setting of suspected CAA,
diagnosed by numerous microbleeds on MRI, compounded by the use of subcutaneous heparin in a 63-year-old female patient. This case broadens
our understanding of a rarely identified progression of CAA and illustrates the need for further investigation of the use of subcutaneous
heparin in the setting of probable CAA. Cerebral amyloid angiopathy (CAA) is an increasingly recognized cause of lobar intracerebral
hemorrhage (ICH) and cognitive impairment in the aging population . CAA accounts for 15% of non-traumatic ICHs in the older population
(greater than 60 years of age) . Definitive diagnosis of CAA requires histopathological analysis, which is of minimal practical use. Thus,
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is the most reliable option for clinical diagnosis of suspected CAA and can be prognostic for recurrent
hemorrhaging . CAA is a vasculopathy resulting from deposition of β-amyloid protein in the media and adventitia of small- and mediumsized
arteries as well as capillaries in the leptomeninges and cerebral cortex . CAA-related bleeds have a posterior predilection with most bleeds
occurring in the occipital lobe . The pathophysiology of microbleeds and ICH in CAA is not well understood, but it is thought to be the
result of vessel weakening and rupture secondary to amyloid deposition . Little evidence has been established pertaining to the time course
of recurrent CAA-related microbleeds or larger hemorrhages. Although several risk factors have been associated with an increased risk of ICH
in CAA, there are no current treatment guidelines specific to recurrent hemorrhaging in CAA . Here we present a rare case of sequential and
fatal lobar hemorrhaging in the setting of probable CAA in a 63-year-old female patient over a one-month period. A 63-year-old female with a
history of multiple sclerosis, chronic right upper extremity weakness, heavy tobacco use, depression, migraines, hypertension, and
dyslipidemia, who was taking 81 mg aspirin daily, was found unresponsive by her family. The patient was emergently seen in a Chicago-area
hospital where computed tomography (CT) of the head demonstrated left frontal lobe hemorrhage with intraventricular extension. The patient
was admitted to the intensive care unit where she was hemodynamically stable, but exhibited worsening mental status. She was aphasic with
right hemiplegia, and was unable to follow commands. A repeat CT head demonstrated a 0.8 cm midline shift, associated edema and mass effect,
and acute intra-axial hematoma, measuring 7.5×4.2 cm axially, centered in the left frontal lobe with intraventricular extension and notable
left subarachnoid hemorrhage (Figure 1A). Emergent craniotomy was performed without complication. An intraoperative diagnosis of
arteriovenous malformation was made, which pathology defined as a cavernoma. During the following days the patient exhibited improving
mental status, however, she remained aphasic with right hemiplegia. One week later she was found to be more lethargic and a follow-up head
CT demonstrated a new right frontal lobe hemorrhage (Figure 1B). A brain MRI demonstrated numerous microbleeds on susceptibility weighted
imaging (SWI) suggestive of CAA (Figure 1D–1F). After this acute event, the patient continued to regain strength bilaterally. Two weeks
later the patient was started on subcutaneous heparin (5,000 units every eight hours) for deep venous thrombosis prophylaxis. Three days
later the patient was found to be more confused with increased drowsiness and left facial droop. A head CT demonstrated new right parietal
cortical and subcortical hemorrhages. Simvastatin and subcutaneous heparin were immediately discontinued. Coagulation studies were within
normal limits. The next day the patient became more lethargic and a head CT revealed three new right frontal bleeds (the largest measuring
4.7 cm) with edema and midline shift (Figure 1C). A decision was made with the family to pursue comfort care only. The patient died three
days later. Cerebral amyloid angiopathy (CAA) should be suspected in patients over the age of 55 years old with spontaneous lobar
microbleeds or a larger hemorrhage in the setting of normotension . Prognosis in a patient with CAA is correlated with the burden of
microbleeds at initial presentation . Several risk factors are associated with CAA-related bleeds including age, Alzheimer disease,
apolipoprotein E ε2 and ε4 alleles, head trauma and, of controversy, medications including thrombolytics, anticoagulants, anti-platelets,
and cholesterol-lowering statins . When the diagnosis of CAA with microbleeds is probable, strict medical management is imperative . Current
treatment of symptomatic CAA-related microbleeds and hemorrhages follows the guidelines for the management of all spontaneous intra-cerebral
hemorrhage . Because the bleeding in CAA is often sporadic, effective prevention strategies are imperative . The PROGRESS trial demonstrated
that blood pressure-lowering treatment provides protection against all types of intracerebral hemorrhage including CAA-related hemorrhage
(77% risk reduction), which may represent a practical therapeutic approach . Our patient’s blood pressure ranged from 172/90 mm Hg to 96/42
mm Hg and elevations were not correlated with ICH (Figure 2). The spatial pattern of the microbleeds was strictly posterior and lobar,
inconsistent with the typical non-lobar, deep location of hypertensive intracerebral hemorrhages . A pathologic diagnosis of cavernoma was
made during the initial craniotomy, which may have marginally contributed to the initial hemorrhage. However, the size of the initial
hemorrhage was magnitudes larger than the mean size of the hemorrhage (13.4±7.3 mm) described by Jeon et al. in 410 patients with
cavernomas. The sequential hemorrhaging was also inconsistent with an etiology of cavernoma; and multiplicity of cavernomas has not been
shown to be a risk for subsequent hemorrhage . Additionally, the literature is replete with reports of medication-associated CAA-related
bleeds, explicitly associated with thrombolytic, anticoagulant, antiplatelet, and statin therapy . However, most controversially is the role
of statin therapy in cerebral microbleeds and ICH. Reports have demonstrated that statin therapy can increase the risk of cerebral
microbleeds , and Westover et al. recommended the avoidance of statins in patients with a history of ICH. Alternatively, a meta-analysis of
31 randomized controlled trials of statin therapy did not find an association between statin therapy and increased risk for ICH . The exact
contributory role of statin therapy in our case was unclear. It seemed clear that the rate of hemorrhaging was increased by concomitant use
of subcutaneous heparin, but ongoing statin therapy may have been an additional risk factor. According to the guidelines for the management
of spontaneous intracerebral hemorrhages adopted by the American Heart Association and American Stroke Association : “After documentation of
cessation of bleeding, low dose subcutaneous low-molecular-weight heparin or unfractionated heparin may be considered for prevention of
venous thromboembolism in patients with lack of mobility after 1 to 4 days from onset.” In our case, deep vein thrombosis prophylaxis with
subcutaneous heparin (5,000 units every eight hours) was initiated after the first two hemorrhages had stabilized and the patient was
clinically improving. Despite the cautious timeframe, three days after initiation of subcutaneous heparin, multiple new hemorrhages
developed resulting in fatal herniation. The recurrence of hemorrhaging in this case was extremely rapid and fatal. In a large Japanese
nationwide survey, the average interval between CAA-related lobar ICH was 11.3 months with recurrent hemorrhages in 31.7% of patients over
the 35.3 month study period . In a recent study, Biffi et al. reviewed 505 cases of recurrent lobar ICH and found zero recurrences within
the first three months and only one recurrence within the first six months . Greenberg et al. found recurrent lobar hemorrhages in 27 of 94
patients (28%) with a mean secondary hemorrhage at 20.8±16.7 months . While a timeline was not specifically indicated for tertiary bleeds
and onward, our patient comparatively demonstrated an accelerated time-line of sequential hemorrhages. The combination of sequential
hemorrhages compounded by the use of subcutaneous heparin broadens our understanding of the disease course and risk factors associated with
CAA. What has been always thought of as a benign anticoagulant, subcutaneous heparin must now be examined, like other anticoagulants, as
having the potential to increase the risk of hemorrhaging in patients with CAA. Statement There were no sources of funding for this report.
(A–C) CT head images. CT head scan on admission (A), one week later (B), and 25 days after admission (C). (D–F) Susceptibility weighted MR
imaging, limited by motion artifact, demonstrates multiple strictly lobar microbleeds (white arrows) suggestive of cerebral amyloid
angiopathy.
