The work was done in Bern, Switzerland. The laboratory work was done in Lausanne, Switzerland. This work was not supported by a grant. The
case has not been presented at any meeting. adrenocorticotropic hormone complete blood count constant rate infusion
hypothalamus–pituitary–adrenocortical high‐performance liquid chromatography locus coeruleus/norepinephrine mean arterial pressure
noninvasive blood pressure packed cell volume pituitary pars intermedia dysfunction The two main physiologic components of the response to a
stressor are mediated by the hypothalamus–pituitary–adrenocortical (HPA) axis and by the locus coeruleus/norepinephrine (LC/NE) autonomic
nervous system. These responses result, respectively, in increases in cortisol and catecholamine concentrations in plasma.1 Excessive
secretion of catecholamines can occur because of neoplasia of the chromaffin cells of the adrenal medulla, a so‐called pheochromocytoma. In
this report, we describe a pony with an adrenal mass and clinical signs suggestive of pheochromocytoma in which measurements of
catecholamines and their metabolites were performed in vivo. A 27‐year‐old Shetland pony mare weighing 205 kg was presented for evaluation
of acute colic poorly responsive to metamizole (dipyrone). The mare had been examined for laminitis 6 years previously and received
corrective shoeing regularly. Clinical signs consistent with an active pheochromocytoma, such as excessive sweating, tachycardia, or
excitement had not been observed before presentation. Upon presentation, the mare was lethargic, moderately painful, tachycardic (80/min),
tachypneic (80/min), and rectal temperature was increased (39.7°C). The mare showed diffuse hypertrichosis, pale mucous membranes, and
prolonged capillary refill time. A rectal examination, limited because of the size of the pony, was unremarkable, and no reflux was obtained
after nasogastric intubation. A transcutaneous abdominal ultrasound examination identified a large amount of anechoic swirling free fluid
(Fig 1) and an approximately 15 × 20 × 20 cm heterogeneous mass cranioventral to the left kidney (Fig 2). Differential diagnoses for the
abdominal mass included hematoma, granuloma, or neoplasia originating from the adrenal gland. No association with kidneys, lymph nodes,
spleen, intestine, or ovaries was visible, and these were considered less likely origins. Hemoabdomen was confirmed by abdominocentesis that
yielded red fluid with a total protein concentration of 60 g/L (reference interval , 0–20 g/L), a leukocyte count of 6.8 × 109/L (RI, 0–5 ×
109/L), a PCV of 34% (RI, 0%), a lactate concentration of 14.6 mmol/L (RI, 0–2 mmol/L), and an absence of platelets. Microscopic examination
of peritoneal fluid disclosed no further abnormalities. Transabdominal sonogram of the ventral abdomen using a 5‐MHz convex probe in a
cranio‐caudal orientation showing large amounts of echoic swirling free fluid within the abdominal cavity (depth of the display: 10 cm).
Cranial is to the left. Transabdominal sonogram of the left paralumbar fossa using a 5‐MHz convex ultrasound probe in a ventro‐dorsal
orientation showing a large heterogenous mass cranioventral to the left kidney (depth of the display: 24 cm). Dorsal is to the left. An
initial CBC indicated a normal hematocrit (38%; RI, 31–47%) and leukocytosis (12.3 × 109/L; RI, 5.3–10.3 × 109/L) characterized by
neutrophilia (8.1 × 109/L; RI, 2.5–6 × 109/L) and monocytosis (0.9 × 109/L; RI, 0.04–0.45 × 109/L). Abnormalities of the biochemistry
profile included severe hyperglycemia (384 mg/dL; RI, 50.5–90.1 mg/dL), hyperlactatemia (16 mmol/L; RI, 0–2 mmol/L), hypoproteinemia (53.1
g/L; RI, 54–73 g/L), hypoalbuminemia (18.6 g/L; RI, 32.2–39.9 g/L), hyperlipidemia (triglycerides, 513 mg/dL; RI, 7.1–33.6 mg/dL), and
increases in BUN (22.4 mg/dL; RI, 9.3–18.6 mg/dL), CK (3328 IU/L; RI, 0–262 IU/L), GGT (45 IU/L; RI, 11–26 IU/L), and GLDH (51 IU/L; RI,
0–14 IU/L). An electrocardiogram (ECG) showed unifocal ventricular tachycardia (Fig 3). Noninvasive blood pressure (NIBP) monitored on
several occasions over the middle coccygeal artery using an oscillometric monitor1 remained normal to mildly low. Mean NIBP noncorrected to
heart level was 62–79 mmHg (reference, 88 ± 14 mmHg).2 An echocardiogram performed when the pony was hemodynamically normal several days
after presentation to the hospital disclosed no abnormalities. Anti‐Müllerian hormone concentration (<0.01 ng/mL; RI, <2 ng/mL), measured to
rule out a granulosa cell tumor of the left ovary, also was normal. ECG shows uniform ventricular tachycardia (first 6 complexes) followed
by sinus tachycardia. Lead I is a base‐apex lead, and the rest are nonconventional leads. Paper speed is 10 mm/s. A secreting
pheochromocytoma was suspected because of the presence of mass cranial to the left kidney, abdominal pain, hemoperitoneum, ventricular
tachycardia, severe hyperglycemia, and severe hyperlactatemia. Initial treatment was aimed at hemodynamic stabilization. Analgesia was
provided because of persistent signs of abdominal pain, and antibiotics were administered to prevent septic peritonitis. Treatment consisted
of IV lactated Ringer's solution2 (100 mL/kg/d), metamizole3 (45 mg/kg IV once), flunixin meglumine4 (1.1 mg/kg IV q12 h), and cefquinome5
(1 mg/kg IV q12 h). The ventricular tachycardia was treated with magnesium sulfate6 (12.5 g IV once over 25 minutes) diluted in 1L of 0.9%
NaCl7 and lidocaine8 (1.3 mg/kg IV over 15 minutes, followed by 0.05 mg/kg/min as a constant rate infusion ). After the initial simultaneous
administration of magnesium sulfate and lidocaine, the rhythm changed to sinus tachycardia (76–140/min). Propranolol9 (0.78 mg/kg PO once)
was given because of concern about the catecholamine effect on cardiac β‐receptors and tranexamic acid10 (5 mg/kg IV once) was administered
because of its antifibrinolytic effects. Protamine zinc insulin11 (0.1 IU/kg SQ once) followed by an IV CRI of regular insulin12 (0.01–0.02
IU/kg/h) was given and blood glucose concentration returned to normal within 12 hours. The mare remained lethargic and anorexic for 24 hours
after the initial treatment was started. After 3 days of supportive treatment, the mare was in good general condition and eating well. All
treatments were stopped after 3 days of hospitalization except for antibiotics and anti‐inflammatory medications which were given for a
total of 5 days. Because of hypertrichosis and the history of chronic laminitis, ACTH plasma concentration was measured 6 days after the
acute episode of colic. The ACTH concentration was increased (104 pg/mL; RI, <28 pg/mL in April),3 and therapy with pergolide13 (2.5 μg/kg
PO q24h) was initiated. Plasma and urine samples were collected simultaneously for the measurement of catecholamines and metanephrines as
previously described in dogs.4 Seven days were allowed after the last dose of propranolol to avoid false positives. Plasma from 3
hospitalized Shetland pony mares, aged 4–9 years, and urine from 1 pony were used as controls. Reasons for hospitalization of the other
ponies were colon impaction and gastric ulcers, colon impaction and retained fetal membranes, and uterine prolapse after parturition,
respectively. The mares were recovering from their diseases, and not severely ill at the time of sampling. Creatinine concentrations were
measured in plasma and nonacidified urine, and urinalysis showed no abnormalities. Plasma samples were collected in chilled heparin tubes,
centrifuged at 4°C, and stored at −80°C protected from light. Ten milliliters of urine was placed in a plain silicone‐coated tube containing
280 μL of 20% HCl. Urinary pH was measured using pH indicator stripes (range of pH, 1‐6), and HCl was added to achieve a pH ≤2 as needed for
proper analysis. Samples were shipped on dry ice and thawed immediately before analysis. Plasma norepinephrine and epinephrine, plasma free
and total normetanephrine and metanephrine were determined by high‐performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) tandem mass spectrometry.5, 6, 7
Urinary norepinephrine, epinephrine, total normetanephrine, and total metanephrine were quantified by HPLC with amperometric detection as
separate compounds.6, 8 The results are expressed as a ratio to urinary creatinine concentrations. Samples were treated with sulfatase (sul)
and glucuronidase (glu) for the analysis of total metanephrine and normetanephrine. The pony with suspected pheochromocytoma had higher
plasma norepinephrine (11.92 nM vs. 0.61, 1.12, and 1.15 nM), total normetanephrine (3.82 nM vs. 0.93, 1.02 and 0.84 nM and 19.24 nM vs.
3.94, 3.84 and 5.58 nM ), and free normetanephrine (3.29 nM vs. 0.73, 0.72 and 0.66 nM) concentrations than the 3 control ponies.
Furthermore, urinary norepinephrine (69.2 nEq/mEq vs. 3.1 nEq/mEq ) and normetanephrine (76.2 nEq/mEq vs. 13.4 nEq/mEq and 384.9 nEq/mEq vs.
48.9 nEq/mEq ) measurements were higher in the diseased animal than in the control pony. All the results are given in Table 1. Results of
plasma (P‐) catecholamines and plasma total and free metanephrines and urinary (U‐) catecholamines, metanephrines to creatinine ratios,
vanillyl mandelic acid, and homovanillic acid to creatinine ratios in a pony with suspected pheochromocytoma (PC) and controls (C1, C2, C3)
The pony was clinically normal after 1 week of hospitalization. An abdominal sonogram identified no free abdominal fluid at that time. The
mass had decreased in size (measuring 10 × 15 × 15 cm approximately) and showed a hyperechoic outer layer with a hypoechoic fluid‐filled
area interpreted as a reorganizing hematoma. Transrectal ultrasound examination of the left adrenal gland was considered but not performed
because of concerns about manipulation leading to an adrenergic crisis. Because of the lack of medical therapy available for treatment of
pheochromocytoma, surgical removal of the adrenal mass was planned and advanced imaging scheduled to prepare for the surgical procedure. To
decrease the potential risk of catecholamine release during general anesthesia, phenoxybenzamine14 (dosing protocol: 0.2 mg/kg PO q24h
twice, then 0.3 mg/kg PO q12h for 2 days, then 0.4 mg/kg PO q12h for 3 days, then 0.5 mg/kg PO q12h for 8 days) was administered. During the
treatment, heart rate remained normal (40–44/min) and mean noncorrected NIBP decreased initially (50 mmHg) and then stabilized at
approximately 66 mmHg. No other adverse effects were observed. Two weeks later, the pony was presented again for further diagnostic
investigations under general anesthesia. A balanced electrolyte solution (2 mL/kg/h) was given for 12 hours before anesthesia, and
phenoxybenzamine therapy was discontinued the evening before the intervention. The pony was premedicated with dexmedetomidine15 (3.5 μg/kg
IV) and levo‐methadone16 (0.05 mg/kg IV), and anesthesia was induced with diazepam17 (0.1 mg/kg IV), propofol18 (2 mg/kg IV), and
thiopental19 (0.25 mg/kg IV). Anesthesia was maintained with isoflurane20 in 100% oxygen and lidocaine21 (1.8 mg/kg/h IV). Mean arterial
pressure >60 mmHg, assessed by NIBP measurement at the base of the tail, was achieved using lactated Ringer's solution2 (10 mL/kg/h),
dobutamine22 (0.2–4 μg/kg/min), and norepinephrine23 (0.1–0.5 μg/kg/min). Heart rate ranged between 36 and 51/min. The mare recovered
without incident. Computed tomography (CT) of the abdomen was performed using a 16‐slice spiral computed tomography scanner. Images were
acquired with 120 kV and 270 mAs. Postcontrast images were acquired after administration of 80 mL nonionic iodinated (300 mg/mL) contrast
medium. A space‐occupying lesion was identified craniomedially to the left kidney, with a cavitary medial part of 7 cm in diameter with a
hypodense center (pre‐ and postcontrast approximately 30 Hounsfield Units ) and a contrast‐enhancing peripheral ring (precontrast, 33 HU;
postcontrast, 97 HU). The laterocaudal part of the lesion was slightly heterogenous and ill‐defined with a diameter of 6 cm. On the right
side, a homogenous, soft tissue‐attenuating and mildly contrast‐enhancing lesion (precontrast, 63 HU; postcontrast, 97 HU) with a diameter
of approximately 6 cm was identified craniomedially to the right kidney (Fig 4). Both mass lesions were suspected to be adrenal glands.
Although exact sizes for adrenal glands of horses on CT are not reported in the veterinary literature, left adrenal glands have been
measured using transrectal ultrasound and the mean diameter (±SD) did not exceed 0.89 ± 0.18 cm.9 Furthermore, adrenal glands are
anatomically described as small, flattened organs with a size of approximately 9–10 cm long, 3–4 cm wide, and approximately 1.5 cm or more
in thickness.10 Assuming that adrenal glands usually have about the same size and would be expected to be even smaller in a pony, we assumed
that both were enlarged in the patient. The cavitary lesion of the left adrenal mass was suspected to be a hematoma in regression or a
cystic pheochromocytoma.11 Differential diagnosis for the enlarged right adrenal gland included adrenal hyperplasia, adenoma,
adenocarcinoma, or pheochromocytoma. Because of the presence of bilateral masses, surgery was not considered and the pony was discharged
with pergolide as the only treatment. The owner reported that the mare had not had signs of disease during the 12 months after discharge.
Transverse postcontrast CT image of the abdomen at the level of the cranial pole of the left kidney (LK), which is located medially to the
spleen. The left adrenal gland (LA) is soft tissue attenuating at its lateral aspect with a cavitary mediodorsal part (white arrows).
Medially to the right kidney (RK), the soft tissue attenuating right adrenal gland (RA) is visible. To the best of our knowledge, this is
the first report of an antemortem diagnosis of pheochromocytoma in an equid using analysis of plasma and urinary catecholamines and
metabolites. Diagnosis and management followed the standard of care in small animals and humans with suspected pheochromocytomas, and such
an approach has been mentioned in previous reports in horses.12 The biochemical test of choice for pheochromocytomas in human medicine is
measurement of plasma or 24‐hour urinary fractioned metanephrines in addition to CT or magnetic resonance imaging.13 Collection of urine
during 24 hours is impractical in horses, and determination of plasma and urinary metanephrine and normetanephrine is considered appropriate
for the differentiation of dogs with pheochromocytomas from those with hypercortisolism, nonadrenal diseases, and healthy controls.4
Pheochromocytoma is considered highly probable in humans with plasma concentrations of normetanephrines and metanephrines >4 times the
reference concentration.14 In the case presented here, these criteria were met for plasma norepinephrine and normetanephrines, urinary
norepinephrine, and normetanephrine‐to‐creatinine ratio. Norepinephrine seemed to be the most markedly increased catecholamine, which agrees
with reports in affected dogs.4 Extrapolation of conclusions from other species should be performed with caution, and results of total
metanephrine and normetanephrine show a remarkable difference between horses and other species because catecholamine metabolites are mostly
glucuroconjugated and not sulfoconjugated.1, 4 Methoxythyramine, a catecholamine metabolite, also is glucuroconjugated in horses.15 We
presented the individual control results rather than an average because only 3 animals were used for comparison. Preliminary data can be
used to define the sample size needed to establish a reference range. Data obtained from an appropriate sized control population should be
checked for normality, and reference ranges established based on the 95% confidence interval. A larger number of horses with
pheochromocytomas will need to be compared to healthy controls to confirm that patterns described in small animals and humans are followed
by horses with pheochromocytomas. It is a limitation of the diagnosis in this case that the comparison was made with a small group of
hospitalized ponies and that the absolute concentrations and ratios were somewhat lower than those commonly described in dogs and people
with pheochromocytomas.4, 14 Nevertheless, the large differences between the case and controls support the diagnosis in these species.
Differences in laboratory methods complicate direct comparison of the results among studies, and reliable reference ranges are not available
for horses. Horses with laminitis or colic have been shown to have increased serum norepinephrine concentrations compared to controls.16
This might have been a confounding factor; however, signs of laminitis or colic were not present at the time of sampling. It is a major
limitation that the diagnosis of pheochromocytoma was not confirmed histopathologically and assessment using radionuclide imaging modalities
was not performed. Pheochromocytomas in horses can be suspected clinically and confirmed postmortem or during exploratory laparotomy.11, 17,
18 Pheochromocytomas often are asymptomatic and often are found incidentally during necropsy in horses. If clinical signs are present, colic
is the most common presenting complaint,19 and hemoabdomen,20, 21 arrhythmias, tachycardia,12, 17 severe hyperglycemia, and hyperlactemia
are commonly reported in horses with pheochromocytomas.19 Hyperglycemia previously has been described in humans with pheochromocytomas
because of increased glycogenolysis and inhibition of insulin secretion caused by increased plasma concentrations of catecholamines.22
Hyperglycemia could have been secondary to pituitary pars intermedia dysfunction (PPID) in the pony we report here. Nevertheless, the pony
responded to insulin therapy and hyperglycemia did not recur. Hyperlactemia has been associated with vasoconstrictive ischemia or
hemorrhagic shock in cases of pheochromocytoma.19 Pheochromocytomas have been described in large animals as single lesions or as part of a
multiple endocrine‐like syndrome.23, 24 Other endocrine tissues affected by hyperplasia or neoplasia in multiple endocrine‐like syndrome
include the thyroid gland, parathyroidal C cells, and the pituitary pars intermedia. Concomitant adrenal hyperplasia and bilateral
pheochromocytomas have been described,19 and 14/32 and 2/32 of horses diagnosed with PPID reportedly had diffuse adrenocortical hyperplasia
and pheochromocytoma, respectively, in a retrospective study.25 Adrenergic crisis has been described in humans with pheochromocytomas during
induction of anesthesia and intubation.26 Phenoxybenzamine, an adrenergic α‐blocker, is the drug of choice to prevent this complication,27
and the protocol used here was adapted from recommendations for humans28 and pharmacological and anecdotal reports in horses.29, 30
Administration of β‐blockers to individuals with pheochromocytomas without prior administration of adrenergic α‐blockers has been
discouraged because of the risk of unopposed α‐adrenergic receptor stimulation causing a hypertensive crisis.31, 32 Administration of
phenoxybenzamine before propranolol would have been indicated in this case. Surgical removal of the tumor is indicated for humans and small
animals with functional and symptomatic pheochromocytomas. Laparoscopic removal is the preferred technique, but laparotomy also is
described.32 To the best of our knowledge, surgical removal of a pheochromocytoma in a horse has not been reported, although the surgical
technique for adrenalectomy is described in normal horses.33, 34 Because of the size and location of the mass, an open approach via the left
flank with the pony in right lateral recumbency and under general anesthesia was planned. Dopamine receptors are expressed in human adrenal
tumors including pheochromocytomas and D2 receptors have inhibitory effects on norepinephrine secretion.35 The hypothesis of a possible
effect of dopamine agonists in the control of hormonal hypersecretion associated with adrenal tumors has been formulated but not proven.36
Pergolide, a dopamine agonist, was administered to the pony described here for the treatment of PPID. The effects of pergolide on
pheochromocytomas in horses are speculative, but interestingly, there was remission of clinical signs during treatment. In conclusion,
measurement of catecholamines and their metabolites in plasma and urine can be used in the diagnosis of suspected pheochromocytoma. Further
information regarding the concentrations of catecholamines and their metabolites in healthy and ill horses and in horses with
pheochromocytomas would help clinicians in managing horses in which this tumor is suspected. Conflict of Interest Declaration: Authors
declare no conflict of interest. Off‐label Antimicrobial Declaration: Authors declare no off‐label use of antimicrobials. Cardell Veterinary
Monitor 9402, CAS Medical Systems, Brandford, CT, USA Ringer‐Lactat “Bichsel” ohne/sans Glucose, Grosse Apotheke Dr. G. Bichsel AG,
Interlaken, Switzerland Vetalgin®, MSD Animal Health GmbH, Luzern, Switzerland Fluniximin, Dr. E. Graeub AG, Bern, Switzerland Cobactan® IV
4.5%, MSD Animal Health GmbH, Luzern, Switzerland Magnesiumsulfat “Bichsel” 10%, Grosse Apotheke Dr. G. Bichsel AG, Interlaken, Switzerland
Natrium chloratum “Bichsel,” Grosse Apotheke Dr. G. Bichsel AG, Interlaken, Switzerland Lidocain 2% Streuli, Streuli Pharma AG, Uznach,
Switzerland Propranolol retard, Helvepharm AG, Frauenfeld, Switzerland Cyclocapron®‐Injektionslösung, Pharmacia GmbH/ Pfizer GmbH, Berlin,
Germany Caninsulin®, MSD Animal Health GmbH, Luzern, Switzerland Novorapid®, Novo Nordisk Pharma AG, Küsnacht, Switzerland Prascend®,
Boehringer Ingelheim (Schweiz) GmbH, Basel, Switzerland Phenoxybenzamin HCl BP, Christoffel‐Apotheke, Bern, Switzerland Dexdomitor®, Provet
AG, Lyssach, Switzerland L‐Polamivet®, MSD Animal Health GmbH, Luzern, Switzerland Valium®, Roche Pharma (Schweiz) AG, Reinach, Switzerland
Propofol 1% MCT, Fresenius Kabi, Oberdorf, Switzerland Pentothal, Ospedalia AG, Hünenberg, Switzerland Attane™, Provet AG, Lyssach,
Switzerland Lidocain 2% Streuli, Streuli Pharma AG, Uznach, Switzerland Dobutrex®, Teva Pharma AG, Basel, Switzerland Noradrenalin
Sintetica, Sintetica S.A., Mendrisio, Switzerland
