Lactobacilli are non-spore forming, lactic acid producing, gram-positive rods. They are a part of the normal gastrointestinal and
genitourinary microbiota and have rarely been reported to be the cause of infections. Lactobacilli species are considered non-pathogenic
organisms and have been used as probiotics to prevent antibiotic associated diarrhea. There are sporadic reported cases of infections
related to lactobacilli containing probiotics. In this paper we discuss a case of an 82 year old female with liver abscess and bacteremia
from lactobacillus after using probiotics containing lactobacilli in the course of her treatment of Clostridium difficile colitis. The
Lactobacillus strain identification was not performed and therefore, both commensal microbiota and the probiotic product should be
considered as possible sources of the strain. Lactobacilli can lead to bacteremia and liver abscesses in some susceptible persons and
greater awareness of this potential side effect is warranted with the increasing use of probiotics containing lactobacilli. Lactobacilli are
facultative anaerobic, non-spore forming, lactic acid producing, and Gram positive bacilli. They are found in the normal microbiota of the
oral cavity, gastrointestinal tract, and female genitourinary tract. Although lactobacilli are generally considered non-pathogenic microbes
and some of their strains are utilized as probiotics to prevent and treat some infections, they have been implicated in some serious
clinical infections including bacteremia, infective endocarditis, intra-abdominal abscess including liver abscess, pancreatic necrosis
infection, pulmonary infections, pyelonephritis, meningitis, postpartum endometritis, and chorioamnionitis . The most common risk factors
for lactobacilli infections that have been reported in the literature are diabetes mellitus, pre-existing structural heart disease (in
infective endocarditis cases), cancer (especially leukemia), total parenteral nutrition use, broad spectrum antibiotic use, chronic kidney
disease, inflammatory bowel disease, pancreatitis, chemotherapy, neutropenia, organ transplantation (especially liver transplantation), HIV
infection and steroids use . The most common predisposing events are dental manipulation, poor dental hygiene, intravenous drug abuse,
abdominal surgery, colonoscopy, probiotics use, and heavy dairy product consumption . The antibiotic susceptibility of lactobacilli is
variable. The most common regimens that have been used to treat lactobacilli are high dose penicillin and ampicillin with or without
aminoglycosides. In a retrospective study of 45 cases of lactobacilli bacteremia, the bacteria were susceptible to ampicillin (100%),
penicillin (96%), clindamycin (100%), erythromycin (100%), and gentamycin (67%), with high resistance rate to vancomycin (73% were
resistant) . Due to rarity of the infections with this microbe, clinical experience and studies are lacking regarding the best antibiotic
regimens. The incidence of serious infections caused by lactobacilli is generally uncommon and rare with liver abscess with only 7 reported
cases in the literature . A previous case of liver abscess caused by a lactobacillus strain (indistinguishable from the strain used in food
preparation) has been reported. In that case, there was a four month history of excessive dairy products consumption before the development
of liver abscess with no use of probiotics. The association between liver abscess and use of probiotics containing lactobacilli has not been
reported previously . In this paper, we describe a case of liver abscess due to lactobacillus strain in an elderly diabetic woman with end
stage renal disease after using probiotics containing lactobacilli in a course of treatment of Clostridium difficile colitis and review the
literature. We followed CARE reporting guidelines in publishing our case report. An 82 year old female with a history of diabetes mellitus,
hypertension and end stage renal disease presented with a 4 day history of generalized weakness, malaise and anorexia. Her symptoms were
associated with low grade fever, nausea and vomiting. She denied abdominal pain, chest pain, cough, or shortness of breath. She had recently
been diagnosed with Clostridium difficile colitis and had been treated with a 2 week course of metronidazole and probiotics containing
lactobacilli. Her past surgical history was significant for a cholecystectomy which was complicated by bleeding in the gallbladder fossa and
required laparoscopic surgery 4 months prior to this presentation. On physical examination, she was febrile with a temperature of 100.6 °F
(38.1 °C). Cardiopulmonary examination revealed decreased breath sounds in the base of right lung. Abdominal examination demonstrated mildly
tender hepatomegaly 3 cm below the costal margin, active bowel sounds, no distension and no guarding or rebound tenderness. Extremities and
skin examinations were unremarkable. Laboratory studies revealed a leukocytosis of 18.6 k/mm3 (normal range: 4–10 k/mm3 ), microcytic
hypochromic anemia with a hemoglobin of 9.8 g/dl (12–16 g/dl), elevated alkaline phosphatase of 435 IU/L (44–147 IU/L), mild elevation of
AST and ALT (97 and 85 IU/L respectively; normal ranges: 5–40 IU/L) and normal bilirubin. Plain chest X-ray (CXR) showed an elevated right
hemidiaphragm with a right lower lobe infiltration and pleural effusion (Fig. 1a). A CT scan of the chest and abdomen showed a 6.6 × 4.7 cm
hypodense, multiloculated mass in posterior aspect of right hepatic lobe (Fig. 1c, d). Empiric antibiotics with imipenem and vancomycin were
begun. The following day with the use of ultrasound guidance, 20 mL of purulent fluid specimen was aspirated from the liver lesion and a
percutaneous pigtail catheter was placed for drainage (Fig. 1b). Gram stain from the aspirated materials showed rare Gram positive cocci,
Gram negative rods but predominantly Gram positive rods. The blood cultures grew Gram positive rods. Bacteriologic studies confirmed that
they were lactobacilli species from both the liver abscess and blood, however the exact strain identification was not performed. Her
hospitalization was complicated with cardiac arrest which she survived. She was hospitalized for 3 weeks with near complete resolution of
the hepatic abscess which was demonstrated on repeat imaging (Fig. 2a, b).Fig. 1 a CXR shows elevated right hemi-diaphragm with right lower
lobe infiltration and pleural effusion. b U/S of RUQ shows hypodensity multiloculated mass in posterior aspect of right hepatic lobe. c, d
CT scan of abdomen shows 6.6 × 4.7 cm hypodensity multiloculated mass in posterior aspect of right hepatic lobe Fig. 2 a CXR after treatment
shows significant improvement comparing to CXR in Fig. 1a. b CT scan of abdomen shows significant improvement with pigtail catheter in place
a CXR shows elevated right hemi-diaphragm with right lower lobe infiltration and pleural effusion. b U/S of RUQ shows hypodensity
multiloculated mass in posterior aspect of right hepatic lobe. c, d CT scan of abdomen shows 6.6 × 4.7 cm hypodensity multiloculated mass in
posterior aspect of right hepatic lobe a CXR after treatment shows significant improvement comparing to CXR in Fig. 1a. b CT scan of abdomen
shows significant improvement with pigtail catheter in place Pyogenic liver abscesses are relatively uncommon, however they are considered
the most common type of intra-abdominal abscesses with an annual incidence of 2.3 cases per 100,000 [21, 22]. The risk factors for
developing pyogenic liver abscess are advanced age, diabetes mellitus, liver transplantation, underlying hepatobiliary disease and history
of malignancy . The mortality rate has decreased significantly over last six decades from 65% before the 1970s to 10–12.3% in recent studies
. Independent risk factors associated with mortality are significant delay in diagnosis, severity of sepsis, presence of gas forming
bacteria, presence of anaerobic infection, hepatopancreaticobiliary malignancy and requirement for open surgical drainage [24, 25]. Liver
abscesses usually result from seeding of bacteria from the portal vein or biliary tract; however, hematogenous spread from systemic
circulation or direct seeding from penetrating wounds may be the main mechanism in other cases [22, 25]. A considerable proportion of liver
abscesses result from polymicrobial aerobic and anaerobic bacteria with some differences based on the underlying disease. The geographic
area may also play a role, for example klebsiella pneumoniae is the most common isolated bacteria in Hong Kong [22, 23, 25]. Pyogenic liver
abscess due to lactobacillus has rarely been reported in the literature. Our case developed in an elderly diabetic woman after four months
of a cholecystectomy which was complicated by bleeding from the surgical site which required surgical drainage. Whether she had bacterial
seeding at the time of the surgery or had bacterial translocation from the colon from probiotic bacteria or intestinal microbiota is not
clear. We used the MeSH database in Pubmed with the terms “lactobacillus” and “liver abscess”. We found 7 additional cases of liver
abscesses due to lactobacilli strains (Table 1) . The median age was 73.5 years (range, 27–82 years), with 62.5% older than 73 years of age.
There was no gender tendency. The most common underlying diseases were diabetes mellitus (62.5%) and hepatopancreaticobiliary diseases
(50%). Predisposing factors were steroids use, heavy dairy product consumption and intratumoral ethanol injection. In our case, the
patient’s recent cholecystectomy and probiotic use were considered predisposing factors. The most frequent presenting symptoms were fever
(87.5%), abdominal pain (37.5%), and vomiting (25%). Leukocytosis and elevated liver enzymes were the most common laboratories findings.
Lactobacillus rhamnosus was the most frequently isolated strain.Table 1Summary of case reports of liver abscesses due to lactobacilli
strainsReferenceAge (years)/SexComorbiditiesPredisposing eventsSymptomsLabsOrganism (site)TreatmentHospital stay lengthOutcomesChan (2010)
74/MDM, HTN, remote history of tonsillar carcinomaMirizzi syndrome (common hepatic duct obstruction secondary to external compression by
gallstone)Fever, abdominal pain for 1 day.Leukocytosis, normal LFTs.L. rhamnosus (blood, pus, gallbladder)Percutaneous drainage,
cholecystectomy, antibiotics (levofloxacin then both clarithromycin and metronidazole were added)59 daysRequired ventilator for some time
and discharge to rehabilitation.Burns (2007) 51/FNoneNoneAbdominal pain, vomiting for 2 weeks.Leukocytosis, elevated LFTs.L.paracasei
(pus)Percutaneous drainage, antibiotics (meropenem with penicillin and gentamicin, then changed to clindamycin)53 daysDeveloped purpura
fulminans. Required ventilator for some time and discharged.Cukovic-Cavka (2006) 27/MCrohn’s diseaseSteroid useFever, diarrhea and
fatigue.Leukocytosis.L.acidophilus (blood, pus)Percutaneous drainage, antibiotics (ciprofloxacin with metronidazole, then Augmentin with
metronidazole)63 daysDischarged.Notario (2003)* 73/FDMN/AFeverN/AL.rhamnosus (blood, pus)Surgical drainage, antibiotics (ampicillin with
gentamicin)N/ADischarged.Rautio (1999) 74/FDM, HTNHeavy dairy consumption.Fever, abdominal pain for 2 weeks.Leukocytosis.L.rhamnosus
(pus)Percutaneous drainage, antibiotics (penicillin, then piperacillin/tazobactam, then ciprofloxacin and clindamycin)42 daysComplicated
with pleural empyema which required surgical thoracotomy and decortication. Discharged.Larvol (1996)* 39/MDM, chronic pancreatitis,
choledochoduodenostomyN/AFeverN/AL.acidophilus (blood, pus)Antibiotics (amoxicillin, gentamicin, augmentin)N/ADischarged.Isobe (1990)
75/M(HCC, Parkinson’s diseaseIntratumoral ethanol injection therapy for HCCFeverIntrahepatic gas by U/S and CT scanL.plantarum
(blood)Antibiotics (piperacillin)52 days (after developing fever)Discharged.Sherid (2016) (the current case)82/FDM,HTN, ESRD,
cholecystectomyCholecystectomy, probiotic useFever, vomitingLeukocytosis, elevate LFTs, right pleural effusionN/APercutaneous drainage,
antibiotics (imipenem, vancomycin)19 daysHer hospital course was complicated by cardiac arrest which she survived but required long term
ventilator. Discharged to nursing home on ventilator M male, F female, DM diabetes mellitus, ESRD end stage renal disease, HCC
hepatocellular carcinoma, HTN hypertension, LFTs liver function tests, N/A not available. *In foreign language; some information from
English abstracts Summary of case reports of liver abscesses due to lactobacilli strains M male, F female, DM diabetes mellitus, ESRD end
stage renal disease, HCC hepatocellular carcinoma, HTN hypertension, LFTs liver function tests, N/A not available. *In foreign language;
some information from English abstracts Although no mortality occurred in these 8 cases, prolonged hospitalization was a striking feature
with a mean hospital stay of 48 days (range, 19–63 days) compared to 16 days in other cases of pyogenic liver abscesses. In a retrospective
study of 200 cases of endocarditis caused by lactobacilli the mortality rate was 23% which was higher in cases of polymicrobial bacteremia
and use of inadequate antibiotics . It has also been shown that lactobacillus infection is a predictor of severe underlying comorbidities
and poor long-term prognosis. In a study by Husni et al. 69% of patients with lactobacilli infections died within 1 year and only one death
was attributed directly to lactobacillus bacteremia which was polymicrobial . Some strains of lactobacilli are used as probiotics to,
presumably, restore non-pathogenic intestinal microbiota and decrease digestive colonization with pathogenic bacteria. The increasing
reports of probiotic related infections have raised concern over the safety of these organisms. The epidemiologic study by Salminen et al.
published in 2002 did not show an increase in lactobacillus bacteremia after wide use of lactobacillus rhamnosus GG as a probiotic which was
introduced to Finland in 1990 . In this study, the average annual incidence of lactobacilli bacteremia was 0.29 cases per 100,000 during the
11 year study period . An increase in nosocomial infections in intensive care pediatric patients and an increase in mortalities in severe
acute pancreatitis have been documented in probiotic groups in randomized placebo-controlled studies [27, 28]. In a systemic review of the
safety of probiotics in 2010 including 53 trials in which 4131 patients received probiotics, all but three trials showed no increase in
complications related to using probiotics . The potential pathogenicity of lactobacilli might come from several mechanisms including the
ability of some strains to bind to intestinal mucosa which may play a role in translocation of lactobacilli into the bloodstream; their
ability to adhere to extracellular matrix proteins such as collagen; their ability to aggregate platelets; their production of certain
enzymes such as glycosidases and proteases which may help to breakdown the glycoproteins of affected tissues . In vitro and in vivo
experimental studies have shown that some strains are more resistant than others to intracellular killing by macrophages and by the
bactericidal effects of nitric oxide . Several cases of lactobacilli related infections have been reported in pediatric and adults using
probiotics containing lactobacilli . The underlying diseases were preexisting heart disease, HIV infection, organ transplantation, diabetes
mellitus, malignancy, and short gut syndrome . There were no cases of liver abscesses which makes our case the first case of lactobacillus
liver abscess linked to probiotics use. In our case, the inflamed colonic mucosa due to Clostridium difficile colitis may have allowed the
translocation of intestinal microbiota lactobacilli or probiotic lactobacilli to the bloodstream and colonized the previously damaged tissue
in liver and gallbladder site. The exact Lactobacillus identification and antibiotic sensitivity were not performed, as well as the culture
from the probiotic product. Whether the probiotics product contained the identical strain of Lactobacillus as the patient’s abscess is not
known. However, the temporal relationship between use of the probiotics containing Lactobacillus and development of liver abscess with
Lactobacillus, make the probiotic product a possible source. In conclusion, probiotics may lead to bacteremia and liver abscesses in some
susceptible persons and greater awareness of this potential side effect is warranted with the increasing use of probiotics containing
lactobacilli. Human immunodeficiency virus This case was presented as a Poster at the ACG Annual Scientific Meeting 2011; Washington, DC.
Not applicable. Not applicable. MS contributed to Study design, literature review, data collection, data analysis, initial manuscript
writing, manuscript review, approval of final version; SS, SS, HS, HH, and SS contributed to study design, literature review, data
collection, data analysis, manuscript review, approval of final version. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. The authors
declare that they have no competing interests. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this Case report
and any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor of this journal. Not applicable.
