Few previous hemodynamic studies demonstrated the detailed features of rupture point of intracranial aneurysms. The hemodynamic simulation
for the case that ruptured during angiography was even rare. In the present study, we studied the hemodynamic characteristics of a posterior
communicating artery segment aneurysm that ruptured during angiography and detailed the hemodynamic features at the rupture point. One
64-years-patient was 60–69 years old and suffered a subarachnoid hemorrhage within 24 h. Standard digital subtraction angiography and three-
dimensional (3D) rotational angiography were performed and an 8 mm left posterior communicating artery segment aneurysm was found. The
patient had a seizure immediately following 3D angiography for about 40 s and the immediate follow-up angiography showed contrast
extravasation from the tip of identified aneurysms. The consequent vital sign of the patient became unstable. Urgent embolization under
general anesthesia was planned, but the relatives refused interventional operation considering the high risk of procedure and poor condition
of the patient. The computational fluid dynamic (CFD) method was used to evaluate the hemodynamic characteristics at rupture point, and the
results showed that the rupture point was associated with markedly low wall shear stress and high oscillatory shear index without flow
impingement. We present a rare case of which the rupture site was identified during angiography. The hemodynamic simulations revealed that
the rupture point was associated with markedly low WSS and high OSI without flow impingement. The result may be unique to this particular
aneurysm; however, our findings provide insight into the hemodynamics of rupture point. The online version of this article
(doi:10.1186/s12883-016-0759-0) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users. Few previous hemodynamic studies
demonstrated the detailed features of rupture point of intracranial aneurysms and only 5 studies with 29 cases have been published
previously . The hemodynamic simulation for the case that ruptured during angiography was even rare [3, 4]. In the present study, we studied
the hemodynamic characteristics of a posterior communicating artery segment aneurysm that ruptured during angiography and detailed the
hemodynamic features at the rupture point. A 64-year old man was admitted to our hospital due to a spontaneous sudden and severe headache
with nausea and vomiting. The patient was healthy, with no prior history of hypertension or diabetes. A physical examination revealed that
the patient was conscious and able to answer questions accurately, and that her limbs were flexible with normal muscle strength grade V, a
positive Kernig’s sign, and a Hunt-Hess grade of II. Standard digital subtraction angiography and three-dimensional (3D) rotational
angiography were performed and an 8 mm left posterior communicating artery segment aneurysm was found. The patient had a seizure immediately
following 3D angiography for about 40 s and the immediate follow-up angiography showed contrast extravasation from the tip of identified
aneurysms (Fig. 1). The rate of contrast emission was 3 mL/s with a total volume of 18 mL for the 3D rotational angiography, and 3 mL/s with
a total volume of 5 mL for standard digital subtraction angiography; the pressure was 200 psi. An additional movie file shows this in more
detail [see Additional file 1]. The consequent vital sign of the patient became unstable. Urgent embolization under general anesthesia was
planned, but the relatives refused interventional operation considering the high risk of procedure and poor condition of the patient.Fig.
1The angiograms performed before rupture (a) and immediately after rupture (b). The rupture point was identified at the tip of the aneurysm
dome (black arrow) The angiograms performed before rupture (a) and immediately after rupture (b). The rupture point was identified at the
tip of the aneurysm dome (black arrow) Additional file 1 Video presentation of contrast extravasation from the tip of identified aneurysms.
(MOV 8989 kb) Additional file 1 Video presentation of contrast extravasation from the tip of identified aneurysms. (MOV 8989 kb) The rupture
point was determined by inspection of extravascular blood in 2D angiography and match on the 3D aneurysm geometry. The aneurysm volume
geometry for this patient was obtained by three-dimensional angiographic data. The aneurysm model was imported into the ICEM CFD (ANSYS
Inc., Canonsburg, Pa, USA) to create 2.5 million finite volume tetrahedral element grids with 3 prism layers elements for computational
fluid dynamic (CFD) simulations. The software, ANSYS CFX 14.0 (ANSYS Inc.) was then used to solve the flow governing Navier-Strokes
equations with the assumption of laminar, incompressible, and Newtonian blood flow. The density and dynamic viscosity of the blood were
specified as 1060 kg/m3 and 0.004 N · s/m2, respectively. The blood vessel wall was assumed to be rigid with no-slip boundary conditions.
The pulsatile velocity profile obtained by transcranial Doppler from a normal subject was applied for the inflow boundary conditions. Three
cardiac cycle simulations were performed for numerical stability and the last cardiac cycle was collected as output. The hemodynamic
characteristics at rupture point and the whole aneurysm dome were calculated for comparison. In each area, peak systolic, end diastolic and
time-averaged wall shear stress (WSS) was measured. Oscillatory Shear Index (OSI) was also calculated to investigate the changes in the WSS
vector within the cardiac cycle. The intra-aneurysmal flow structure was also evaluated to determine the flow impingement and the contour of
velocity was depicted on a cutting plane. Demonstrated in Fig. 1, the rupture point was identified at the distal tip of aneurysm dome. The
area of rupture point showed a low WSS distribution both at peak systole and end diastole (Fig. 2a and b). The time-averaged WSS at rupture
point was only 2.7% of the value at the whole aneurysm dome (Table 1). The entire aneurysm dome showed low OSI except the area of rupture
point. A markedly high OSI was found at the area of rupture point, which was seven times higher than that at aneurysm dome. (Table 1 and
Fig. 2g). The intra-aneurysmal flow structure was relatively simple and stable comparing the blood streamlines between peak systolic and end
diastolic (Fig. 2c and d). On the cutting plane, no concentrated flow impact on the area of rupture point at both peak systole and end
diastole (Fig. 2e and f).Fig. 2Hemodynamic characteristics of the aneurysm dome and rupture point just before the rupture. Black arrows
indicated the rupture point. The hemodynamics of the case at peak systole was demonstrated at the first row and that at end diastole were at
the second row. Wall shear stress (WSS, a and b), intra-aneurysmal streamline (c and d), velocity at a cutting plane (e and f) and the
oscillatory shear index (OSI, g) were demonstrated respectively. Low WSS and high OSI were found at the rupture point without flow
impingement Table 1Hemodynamic characteristics at rupture point and dome areaHemodynamicsRupture pointDomeOSI0.056860.00799WSS at peak
systole, pa0.0272.964WSS at end diastole, pa0.0030.852WSS time averaged, pa0.0461.722 OSI oscillatory shear index, WSS wall shear stress
Hemodynamic characteristics of the aneurysm dome and rupture point just before the rupture. Black arrows indicated the rupture point. The
hemodynamics of the case at peak systole was demonstrated at the first row and that at end diastole were at the second row. Wall shear
stress (WSS, a and b), intra-aneurysmal streamline (c and d), velocity at a cutting plane (e and f) and the oscillatory shear index (OSI, g)
were demonstrated respectively. Low WSS and high OSI were found at the rupture point without flow impingement Hemodynamic characteristics at
rupture point and dome area OSI oscillatory shear index, WSS wall shear stress In this study, we described a rare case that ruptured during
angiography with confirmed rupture point and used CFD method to evaluate the hemodynamic characteristics at rupture point. Our results
showed that the rupture point was associated with markedly low WSS and high OSI without flow impingement. Previous literature on hemodynamic
characteristics of rupture point was reviewed (Table 2) and the results were controversial.Table 2Published articles of hemodynamic
characteristics at rupture pointReferenceCase numberRupture point identificationHemodynamic resultsHodis et al. 12D imageConcentrated
impingement jet with elevated WSS and pressure at peak systoleKono et al. 1Fused 3D imageLow WSS at end diastole and high pressure at peak
systoleOmodaka et al. 6Inspection in surgeryLow WSS and high OSIFukazawa et al. 12Inspection in surgeryLow WSS and low flow-velocity
patternCebral et al. 9Inspection of extravascular blood in volume rendered 3D angiograms (n = 4) and/or additional CT images (n = 5)The
rupture site in 8 of 9 aneurysms (89%) had thinner and stiffer walls in regions of abnormally high WSS WSS wall shear stress, OSI
Oscillatory Shear Index, 2D 2-dimensional, 3D 3-dimensional, CT computed tomography Published articles of hemodynamic characteristics at
rupture point WSS wall shear stress, OSI Oscillatory Shear Index, 2D 2-dimensional, 3D 3-dimensional, CT computed tomography Hodis et al.
performed a similar study on an anterior communicating artery aneurysm, which also ruptured during the angiography. According to their
results, a concentrated jet that impinged directly at the site of rupture, and elevated WSS and pressure were also found near the rupture
site at peak systole. Another study by Kono et al. also reported a rare case using CFD simulation. In that case, low WSS at end diastole and
high pressure at peak systole were observed at the rupture site. As mentioned in that study, the possible mechanism of rupture is that low
WSS at end diastole caused degeneration and thinning of the aneurysm wall and that high pressure at peak systole (impingement zone) resulted
in rupture of the thinning wall. However, the rupture point in our present case did not shown direct flow impingement with low WSS through
the cardiac circle. Omodaka et al. and Fukazawa et al. studied a total of 18 middle cerebral artery aneurysms with intraoperative
confirmation of rupture point using CFD method. Similar results were obtained in both studies that the time-averaged WSS at the rupture
point was significantly lower than that at the aneurysm wall without the rupture point. Recently, Cebral et al. analyzed 9 aneurysms of
which the rupture site could be identified in 3D images to investigate the effects of abnormal hemodynamics (either high or low WSS).
According to their results, the models assuming wall thinning and stiffening in regions of abnormally high WSS were able to explain most of
the observed rupture sites (8 of 9 cases). The previous studies have demonstrated conflicting results about the local hemodynamic
characteristics of the rupture site . In our present study, a markedly low WSS and high OSI was associated with rupture point without high
flow impingement. Our previous study evaluated the hemodynamic characteristics of aneurysms just before rupture and low WSS was also
revealed to be associated with rupture of the unruptured aneurysms . Low WSS and high OSI are known to cause dysfunction of endothelial
surface inducing nitrous oxide, increase endothelial permeability and consequently promote inflammatory cell infiltration [7, 8]. These
remodeling process might thin and weaken of the vessel wall leading to further rupture [9, 10]. Our findings in this study may provide
insight into the mechanism of aneurysm rupture. However, the result of the present case might be unique and whether high or low WSS is the
critical in aneurysm rupture remains controversial. The conflicting simulation results might be affected by many factors, including the clot
at rupture site, vasospasm, aneurysm location and method used for identifying the rupture points. Further studies with larger sample size
are needed to investigate the hemodynamic characteristics of rupture point. Other limitations were also needed to be addressed. The
hemodynamics in aneurysm before and after the rupture may be different for the consequence of a change in morphology . The rupture from an
unruptured aneurysm might be different from the mechanism of the rebleeding of a ruptured aneurysm. The hemodynamics is one of the important
factors of aneurysm rupture and may not comprehensively explain the rupture mechanism. Other pathophysiological factors may also involve.
The patient-specific inflow waveform was not available in this study, which might cause bias in simulation results. Some other assumptions,
as rigid wall, laminar flow, and Newtonian blood might also induce bias. We present a rare case of which the rupture site was identified
during angiography. The hemodynamic simulations revealed that the rupture point was associated with markedly low WSS and high OSI without
flow impingement. The result may be unique to this particular aneurysm; however, our findings provide insight into the hemodynamics of
rupture point. Computational fluid dynamics Digital subtraction angiography Low shear area Oscillatory shear index Wall shear stress None.
This work was supported by National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 81301003, 81371315, 81471167 and 81220108007) and Special
Research Project for Capital Health Development (Grant No.2014-1-1071). The dataset supporting the conclusions of this article is included
within the article. All clinical data are stored by information system at Department of Interventional Neuroradiology, Beijing Neurosurgical
Institute and Beijing Tian Tan Hospital, Capital Medical University. YZ carried out the simulational study and drafted the manuscript. LJ
and YZ performed the data collection and data analysis. XY and JL participated in the design of this study and helped to check the
manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. The authors declare that they have no competing interests. Informed consent
was obtained from the patient. The ethics committee of Beijing Tian Tan Hospital approved this study.
