Although formaldehyde is well known to cause type 4 hypersensitivity, immunoglobulin E (IgE)-mediated hypersensitivity to formaldehyde is
rare. Here, we report a case of recurrent generalized urticaria after endodontic treatment using a para-formaldehyde (PFA)-containing root
canal sealant and present a review of previous studies describing cases of immediate hypersensitivity reactions to formaldehyde. A 50-year-
old man visited our allergy clinic for recurrent generalized urticaria several hours after endodontic treatment. Prick tests to latex,
lidocaine, and formaldehyde showed negative reactions. However, swelling and redness at the prick site continued for several days. The level
of formaldehyde-specific IgE was high (class 4). Thus, the patient was deemed to have experienced an IgE-mediated hypersensitivity reaction
caused by the PFA used in the root canal disinfectant. Accordingly, we suggest that physicians should pay attention to type I
hypersensitivity reactions to root canal disinfectants, even if the symptoms occur several hours after exposure. Formaldehyde is commonly
used for medical applications, including disinfectants, medications, and dental procedures, especially as a root sealant.1 Formaldehyde, a
low-molecular weight organic chemical, is a well-known irritant, but also an allergen acting as a hapten.2 Para-formaldehyde (PFA) is
generated from formaldehyde through a condensation reaction with a typical degree of polymerization of 8–100 units (Fig. 1). PFA in powder
form is converted to formaldehyde under heat upon entering the body. It is used as a fumigant, disinfectant, fungicide, and fixative.
Although several case reports have described type I hypersensitivity to formaldehyde, there are no reports thereof in Korea. We report a
case of recurrent generalized urticaria induced by formaldehyde through an immunoglobulin E (IgE)-mediated reaction to a root canal sealant.
We also review and characterize the clinical features of formaldehyde hypersensitivity. A 50-year-old man visited the allergy clinic because
of recurrent generalized urticaria over one year. He had visited the emergency room several times for repeated generalized urticaria. The
symptoms always occurred in the evening or night, beginning with axillary and inguinal pruritus, followed by erythematous conglomerated
wheals over the entire body. No systemic symptoms, including wheezing, dyspnea, or hypotension, were observed. Systemic steroids and
antihistamines improved the urticaria, allowing the patient to return home. His past history was notable only for cold urticaria. A thorough
history revealed that the symptoms always developed at least 3–4 hours after dental treatment. However, the patient denied having erythema
or pruritus on the oral mucosa and cheeks. No oral or injectable medication was administered during the dental treatment, except root canal
disinfectants and local anesthesia. The root canal sealant was Depulpin® (VOCO, Cuxhaven, Germany), containing PFA and lidocaine
hydrochloride. We performed prick tests and/or intradermal tests for latex (Allergopharma, Reinbek, Germany), lidocaine hydrochloride (Dai
Han Pharm. Co., Seoul, Korea), and formaldehyde (Junsei Chemical Co., Tokyo, Japan) (Table 1). Physiological saline and histamine were used
as controls. The skin tests showed negative immediate results. However, local swelling and erythema at the formaldehyde prick site occurred
the following day and continued for several days. Laboratory tests showed an elevated serum total IgE (211.40 IU/mL), and the formaldehyde-
specific IgE was 43.2 kI/L (class 4; CAP RIA Pharmacia, Uppsala, Sweden). Results were negative for 35 common allergen-specific IgE
antibodies, including dust mites (Dermatophagoides farinae and Dermatophagoides pteronyssinus), cat, dog, cockroaches, tree, grass, weed
pollen, mold, et al. (AdvanSure Allergy Screen®; LG Life Sciences, Seoul, Korea). To date, the patient has avoided formaldehyde exposure and
experienced no subsequent events. Formaldehyde is widely used in various forms, including gas, formalin solution, PFA, and trioxymethylene.
Most adverse reactions are related to toxic and irritant effects, such as irritant dermatitis from cutaneous exposure and nasal, laryngeal,
and bronchopulmonary symptoms from inhalation.2 Formaldehyde can also act as a sensitizer at low concentrations, inducing hypersensitivity.3
Allergic contact dermatitis to formaldehyde is the most frequent clinical manifestation. The underlying mechanisms of formaldehyde-induced
hypersensitivity have been characterized for allergic contact dermatitis. Formaldehyde acts as a contact allergen and a hapten, subsequently
combining with self-proteins and inducing a hypersensitivity reaction.4 As in this case, formaldehyde can react with other molecules, such
as cutaneous proteins, serum proteins, or proteins of the pulp chamber or of the periapex, and also with other elements of the root canal
sealant to become a complete allergen.5 An IgE-mediated response to formaldehyde is uncommon. Antibodies against formaldehyde could develop
in patients intravenously exposed to formaldehyde-sterilized dialyzers.6 Kramps, et al.7 reported that exposure to formaldehyde, even at
high concentrations, rarely evokes IgE antibodies. This may explain why so few type I reactions to formaldehyde have been reported. However,
recent case reports have demonstrated that type I hypersensitivity reactions are not rare, especially during dental procedures and
treatments. We summarize the cases of immediate-type reactions caused by PFA-containing dental materials in Table 25891011121314151617
including our case. Anaphylaxis, the most common manifestation, occurred in 15 cases (65%). This suggests that formaldehyde-induced type I
reactions can be life-threatening. Other symptoms included general urticaria, angioedema, and local edema. Interestingly, type I
hypersensitivity to formaldehyde showed time differences between exposure and reaction development. Among the reported cases, 16 patients
showed symptoms within 2 to 12 hours after PFA exposure. This may be due to a gradual release of formaldehyde from water-soluble PFA.
Formaldehyde in the root canal penetrates through the dentin and exits through the teeth. Formaldehyde outside the teeth is detectable 30
minutes after treatment with PFA-containing root canal fillings and gradually increases over 24 hours.18 These findings explain why
hypersensitivity reactions occur several hours after dental procedures, even though the reaction is type I. In most cases, serum IgE was
positive. The degree of serum IgE varied among cases, and the serum IgE level was not correlated with symptom severity. While we did not
perform patch tests, considering the pattern of progression of erythema and swelling after the prick test, this case might be viewed as a
combined type I and type IV reaction. Previous reports demonstrated the coexistence of type I and type IV reactions in individual cases.6 In
mice, combined type I and type IV reactions occurred when a hapten was repeatedly applied to animal skin.19 In this animal model, repeated
hapten application is believed to trigger a shift in the immune response from Th1 to Th2. Type I reactions to formaldehyde are also observed
in hemodialysis patients.20 This suggests that the hypersensitivity can occur regardless of exposure route. These findings highlight the
importance of careful formaldehyde application, in any form, to patients with a history of formaldehyde allergy. In conclusion, this is the
first case of a type I reaction to formaldehyde present in root canal disinfectants confirmed by the presence of specific IgE in the
Republic of Korea. Our findings urge clinicians to appreciate that formaldehyde allergy can cause serious clinical manifestations.
Additionally, specific IgE is a useful diagnostic tool for type I hypersensitivity to formaldehyde. The authors have no financial conflicts
of interest. *1000 pnu/mL, †1% Aqueous solution. SD, standard deviation; NMD, not mentioned.
