Animal Medical Center formalin‐fixed paraffin embedded Gomori's methenamine silver intergenic transcribed spacer New York City polymerase
chain reactions Ziehl‐Neelsen A 6‐year‐old, female, spayed American Pitbull terrier was presented for progressive lethargy, weakness, and
anorexia of 3‐weeks duration. The dog was found as a stray in New York City (NYC) approximately 4 years earlier, assessed to be 2 years of
age, and in very poor condition. Pertinent past medical history included a deep hindquarter wound and minor injuries resulting from
porcupine encounters. After adoption, the dog lived in NYC, spending summers and weekends in western Massachusetts, running freely on a
large property with open fields and woodlands. Before presentation, the dog was healthy and had received routine vaccinations. Ticks were
found by her owners on the surface of her fur but were not embedded. Initial physical examination revealed a body weight of 19 kg, pyrexia
(103.6°F), and sensitivity over the epaxial muscle region. Clinical pathology abnormalities included mild hypoalbuminemia (2.4 g/dL, range
2.7–3.9 g/dL), hyperglobulinemia (5.9 g/dL, range 2.4–4.8 g/dL), and lymphopenia (847/μL, range 1060–4950/μL). Fecal flotation test results
were negative. An injection of meloxicam1 (dose not provided) was given SC, and metronidazole2 (20 mg/kg PO q12h) was prescribed for 8 days.
During the following week, the dog was reexamined for increasing lethargy, weakness, and pyrexia (103.4°F). Lyme quantitative C6 ELISA
(Enzyme linked immunosorbent assay) was negative (<10 U/mL, range <30 U/mL)3. The dog was seroreactive to Anaplasma phagocytophilum (1 :
400) and Ehrlichia canis (1 : 25) antigens by immunofluorescence antibody immunoassay, but was not seroreactive to Rickettsia rickettsii 3.
Doxycycline4 (10 mg/kg PO q24h) and meloxicam1 (6 mg/kg PO q24h) were prescribed. When reexamined 4 days later, the patient's rectal
temperature was 100.2°F. Multiple, nonpainful, 1–2 cm diameter, raised cutaneous masses were observed on the left thigh and right ventral
abdomen. Punch biopsies were obtained from the 2 ulcerated mass lesions and immediately fixed in formalin, after which the dog was
prescribed metoclopramide5 (0.3 mg/kg PO q12h) and firocoxib6 (6 mg/kg PO q24h) and referred to the Animal Medical Center (AMC). Upon
presentation to the AMC, the dog was hypothermic (95.9°) and eupneic at rest. Respiratory rate and effort increased with ambulation.
Thoracic auscultation revealed focal, right‐sided, fine, inspiratory crackles, and a sinus arrhythmia. Femoral pulse pressure was
synchronous and hypokinetic. Neurological examination revealed lethargic mentation, decreased response to stimuli, and inconsistent
conscious proprioceptive deficits. Gentle abdominal palpation elicited cranial and caudal discomfort. Venous blood gas findings were
consistent with a metabolic acidosis. The dog was hypoxemic (SpO2, 84%). Oscillometric blood pressure was 109/73 mmHg; however, systolic
blood pressure dropped to 70 mmHg during hospitalization. Other laboratory abnormalities included neutrophilia (13.6 K/μL, range, 2.940—12.7
K/μL), thrombocytopenia (51 K/μL, range, 143–448 K/μL), increased alkaline phosphatase (587 U/L, range, 5–160 U/L), aspartate
aminotransferase (76 U/L, range, 16–55 U/L) and creatine kinase (320 U/L, range, 10–200 U/L), hypoalbuminemia (1.1 g/dL, range, 2.7–3.9
g/dL), hyperglobulinemia (5.9 g/dL, range, 2.4–4.0 g/dL), hyperbilirubinemia (2.2 mg/dL, range, 0.0–0.3 mg/dL), (unconjugated 1.2 mg/dL,
range, 0.0–0.2 mg/dL, conjugated 1.0 mg/dL, range, 0.0–0.1 mg/dL), azotemia (blood urea nitrogen 168 mg/dL, range, 9–31 mg/dL; creatinine
1.9 mg/dL, range, 0.5–1.5 mg/dL), and hyponatremia (124.4 mmol/L, range 135.0–148.0 mmol/L). Thoracic radiographs revealed a diffuse,
alveolar pulmonary pattern. Abbreviated abdominal and thoracic ultrasound examinations detected pleural, pericardial, and peritoneal
effusions. Fluid removed via abdominocentesis on 2 attempts revealed clotting blood (PCV/TS 13/5.6) and nonclotting serosanguinous fluid
(PCV 3%). Cytologic evaluation of the serosanguinous fluid identified erythrocytes, few neutrophils, and band neutrophils. Punch biopsy
results revealed pyogranulomatous, necrotizing dermatitis, and panniculitis. Special stains for fungus (Gomori's methenamine silver, GMS)
and acid fast bacteria (Ziehl‐Neelsen, ZN) were negative. Despite supportive emergency treatment, vital signs declined. The patient's owners
elected euthanasia and granted permission for necropsy, 16 days after initial medical examination. The postmortem interval was between 6 and
12 hours. Approximately 350 mL of serosanguinous, pleural effusion and 60 mL of serosanguinous, pericardial effusion intermixed with fibrin
were present. The heart was mildly enlarged (1.14% of body weight). Visible from the epicardium of all 4 cardiac chambers was a miliary
pattern created by myriad pinpoint, multifocal to coalescing, tan to white nodular foci (Fig 1) which extended into the myocardium and
endocardium. The left atrioventricular valve leaflets were thickened at the distal aspect without chordae tendineae involvement, consistent
with grade II myxomatous valvular degeneration.1 The lungs were diffusely dark red, rubbery to firm, and upon sectioning, exuded
serosanguinous fluid. Sections from the right middle and right cranial lung lobes sank in formalin, suggesting cellular infiltration. The
abdomen contained 30 mL of serosanguinous effusion and small amounts of clotted blood (the latter presumed to be secondary to
abdominocentesis). The kidneys were bilaterally enlarged and contained myriad, multifocal to coalescing, tan to light red, irregular,
nodular foci, ranging from pinpoint to 1.0 cm in diameter (Figs 2, 3). Marked hepatomegaly was present (5.5% body weight), and the liver had
a diffusely enhanced reticular pattern with plaques of fibrin over the capsule and diaphragm. A single porcupine quill was encased in the
proximal right lateral liver lobe with no grossly apparent tissue reaction. Lymphadenomegaly was observed including the retropharyngeal,
mandibular, sternal, renal, tracheobronchial, pancreaticoduodenal, and mesenteric lymph nodes. Heart, dog. Myriad, multifocal to coalescing
white to tan nodular foci are visible from the epicardium of the right and left ventricles and atria. Bar = 5 mm. Kidney, dog. Visible from
the renal cortex are dozens of multifocal to coalescing, tan nodular foci, which range from pinpoint to 1 cm in diameter. Bar = 5 mm.
Impression smears of the kidney and heart revealed large numbers of neutrophils and macrophages, with fewer lymphocytes and plasma cells.
Bacteria were not observed. Cardiac histopathology revealed multifocal to coalescing, transmural, severe, pyogranulomatous,
lymphoplasmacytic myocarditis, epicarditis, and endocarditis (pancarditis) with regional cardiomyocyte degeneration and necrosis (Fig 4).
There was variable inflammation in the right and left atrioventricular valves and pulmonic and aortic valves. Rare, granulomatous,
pyogranulomatous, or lymphoplasmacytic vasculitis was noted. The kidneys contained extensive, multifocal to coalescing, pyogranulomatous,
tubulointerstitial nephritis with degeneration, necrosis and regeneration of tubules in areas of inflammation (Fig 5). In the lungs,
neutrophilic, pyogranulomatous, and lymphoplasmacytic interstitial pneumonia was present in all lobes, with necrosis, fibrin exudation,
edema, alveolar histiocytosis, arteritis, periarteritis, and mild type II pneumocyte hyperplasia. Pyogranulomatous and lymphoplasmacytic
arteritis and periarteritis were prominent in lung samples (Fig 6). Chronic, passive hepatic congestion was observed. Pyogranulomatous
meningitis, encephalitis, anterior uveitis, scleritis, lymphadenitis, tracheitis, peritracheitis, cystitis, capsular splenitis, and
mediastinal periarteritis were also noted. In addition to mild lymphadenitis, enlarged lymph nodes exhibited changes consistent with
reactive hyperplasia. The adrenal glands did not exhibit adrenalitis or atrophy. Heart, dog. Low magnification view of the right ventricle
and atrium. Multifocal to coalescing regions of increased cellular density (pyogranulomatous inflammation) are visible in the epicardium,
myocardium, and endocardium, consistent with pancarditis. H&E. Bar = 500 μm. Inset. Higher magnification view of pyogranulomatous
inflammation within the left ventricular myocardium. Neutrophils and macrophages are observed throughout the myocardial interstitium,
separating cardiomyocytes. Regional cardiomyocytes undergo degeneration and necrosis (arrow), with sarcoplasm hypereosinophilia, loss of
visible striations, and karyorrhectic debris. HE. Bar = 20 μm. Kidney, dog. Low magnification view of a section of kidney. Large regions of
multifocal to coalescing hypercellularity are present within the cortex, representing pyogranulomatous nephritis. HE. Bar = 500 μm. Inset.
Higher magnification view of a section of kidney. Neutrophils and macrophages are observed throughout the interstitium. The renal tubular
epithelial cells undergo degeneration, necrosis, and regeneration, with cytoplasmic hypereosinophilia, nuclear pyknosis, karyolysis (arrow),
and crowding of tubular epithelial nuclei. HE. Bar = 20 μm. Lung, dog. Photomicrograph of a section of lung. The interstitium is
hypercellular, containing mixed inflammatory infiltrates, including neutrophils, macrophages, lymphocytes, and plasma cells. Hemorrhage,
edema, and alveolar macrophages are present within the alveolar spaces. Inflammatory cells extend into the wall of an arteriole (arteritis,
arrow). HE. Bar = 50 μm. Special stains for fungus (GMS), acid fast bacteria (ZN and Fite faraco), protozoa (periodic acid–Schiff), and
bacteria (Brown and Brenn, Warthin‐Starry) were negative on the heart, kidney, and lungs. Warthin‐Starry silver stains contained abundant
artifact, which hindered interpretation. DNA was extracted from fresh‐frozen canine heart, formalin‐fixed, paraffin‐embedded (FFPE) heart,
kidney, lung, lymph node, trachea, urinary bladder, adrenal glands, brain and eye tissues with DNeasy Blood and Tissue Kit7 according to the
manufacturer's instructions. Elution buffer was used as a reagent control with each set of DNA extractions. DNA concentration and purity
were determined with a spectrophotometer.8 Extracted DNA was stored at −20°C. Bartonella genus and B. koehlerae species‐specific PCRs were
performed with primers designed to amplify the 16–23S intergenic transcribed spacer (ITS) region.2 Bartonella DNA was amplified only from
fresh heart tissue, whereas FFPE kidney, lung, lymph node, trachea, urinary bladder, adrenal glands, brain, and eye were PCR negative for
Bartonella spp. By sequencing, Bartonella henselae San Antonio 2 (BhSA2) DNA amplified from fresh heart tissue shared 100% (444/444 base
pairs) DNA sequence similarity with BhSA2 (GenBank accession number AF369529.1). Eubacterial PCR with pan oligonucleotide primers targeting
the 16S rRNA gene was performed as described previously on FFPE heart, kidney, lung, lymph node, trachea, urinary bladder, adrenal glands,
brain, and eye, respectively.3 Briefly, 25 μL reaction volume consisted of 10 μM forward (fD1‐5‐AGAGTTTGATCCTGGCTCAG‐3; Escherichia coli
spanning position 339–357) and reverse (rP2‐5‐ACGGCTACCTTGTTACGACTT‐3; E. coli spanning position 519–536) primers, 5 μL template DNA and
12.5 μL of MyTaq master mix.9 The thermocycling conditions included initial denaturation (94°C for 2 minutes followed by 35 cycles of
denaturation (94°C for 30 seconds), annealing (68°C for 30 seconds) extension (72°C for 1 minute), and final extension (72°C for 1 minute).3
None of the FFPE tissues tested were positive for pathogenic bacteria. Scrolls from FFPE blocks of heart, kidney, and lung were submitted
for PCR testing for canine circovirus, canine herpesvirus, canine adenovirus, Blastomyces spp., Histoplasma spp., Coccidiomyocoides spp.,
Cryptococcus spp., Sporothrix spp., Trichophyton spp.,10 Borrelia burgdorferi, Anaplasma spp., Rickettsia spp., Ehrlichia spp., and
Bartonella.11 All of these PCR results were negative. Deparaffinized floating sections (50 μm) of the dog's heart were immunostained with a
mouse anti‐B. henselae antibody12 at 1 : 100 dilution and a secondary antibody donkey anti‐mouse conjugated to Alexa 48813 at 1 : 400
dilution by previously published protocols.4 Thirteen 0.45‐μm optical sections (total Z projection = 5.85 μm) were captured by multiphoton
laser scanning microscopy (Nikon A1RMP—University of Minnesota Imaging Center) with a Nikon Plan Apo LWD25X 1.10W DICN2, Melville, NY 11747,
USA objective and electronic zoom = 2). Bartonella henselae organisms (green) were visualized in the myocardium (Fig 7). These organisms
were frequently amorphous and nonlinear, interpreted to be present in clumps or clusters. With multiphoton microscopy, we were able to
clearly separate the epifluorescent signal contribution of endogenous lipofuscin (red channel) from the B. henselae immunoreactivity (green
channel).5, 6 Heart tissue incubated with only the secondary antibody (antibody control) showed no signal in the green channel (data not
shown). A negative control on normal canine heart tissue was not performed. Multiphoton laser scanning microscopy demonstrates Bartonella
henselae immunoreactivity (green, large white arrows) in the myocardium. Fluorescence excitation was at 970 nm, and emission data were
collected at 535 nm to capture the green channel epifluorescence and 620 nm to capture red channel epifluorescence. Under these image
capture settings, there is no contribution by lipofuscin in the green channel. Erythrocytes (asterisks) appear yellow due hemoglobin
autofluorescence in both the red and green emission channels (535 and 609 nm). Inflammatory cells do not autofluoresce (not visible). Image
is a single in‐focus projection of 22 0.45‐μm‐thick optical z‐sections captured with an Apo LWD 25X 1.10W DIC N2 objective on a Nikon A1RMP
multiphoton microscope in the University Imaging Centers at the University of Minnesota. Orthogonal or right angle data, YZ and XZ
projections, on the right and bottom margins of the image (respectively) display the 3‐dimensional data in a 2‐dimensional format. Scale
bar = 20 μm. This report describes pyogranulomatous myocarditis, epicarditis, and endocarditis (pancarditis) in a dog infected with B.
henselae SA2. Bartonella henselae organisms were documented in the heart using Bartonella genus‐specific 16–23S ITS elements PCR
amplification from fresh heart tissue. Bartonella henselae organisms were visualized with immunoreactivity with multiphoton laser confocal
microscopy, a novel technique which has not been previously described for identification of Bartonella in canine tissue. This case was
notable for its wide‐ranging, multi‐organ pathology, particularly pyogranulomatous pancarditis, nephritis, and interstitial pneumonia with
tricavitary effusion. We were unable to document coinfection with other infectious organisms. Diagnostic investigations in this case were
limited by the lack of bacterial culture or virus isolation on fresh tissues at the time of necropsy. Collectively, findings were suggestive
of bacteremia; however, neither Bartonella spp. nor any other infectious organisms could be identified in multiple additional organs tested
by PCR, including 16S rDNA eubacterial PCR for fastidious and nonfastidious bacteria. We were unable to demonstrate the colocalization of
Bartonella organisms in the inflammatory foci with traditional immunohistochemistry despite the immune reaction demonstrated with confocal
microscopy. Possible explanations for these discrepancies are discussed. Bartonella henselae has important one health implications and has
been associated with a wide spectrum of clinical disease syndromes in dogs and humans.7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18 Bartonella
spp. are Gram‐negative, alpha‐proteobacteria implicated as a cause of culture‐negative endocarditis, arrhythmias, myocarditis, and sudden
death in animals and humans.8 This fastidious, intracellular, vasculotropic bacterium is commonly referred to as a stealth pathogen and
characteristically causes persistent intravascular infections.9, 10 Bartonella spp. may cause a chronic relapsing bacteremia among reservoir
hosts and resultant opportunistic infections in nonreservoir hosts.9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17 Due to Bartonella's ability to cause
persistent infection within numerous cell types, demonstration of causation is often challenging and requires a high index of suspicion.17
Additional, follow‐up PCR performed on FFPE tissues from multiple organs was negative. The FFPE heart samples were obtained from a different
location than the fresh cardiac tissue. Pathogen DNA amplification may be affected by the size of the tissue placed in formalin, the type of
tissue, and the duration of formalin fixation before embedding. DNA degradation during formalin fixation has been well documented,7, 19
especially in detecting B. henselae in splenic7 and skin tissues (N. Balakrishnan, Perdergraft JS, Kolluru S, Lappin M, Breitschwerdt EB,
unpublished data). Additionally, low numbers of Bartonella within some of the inflammatory lesions or the history of antibiotic treatment
may have mitigated the ability to detect bacterial pathogens in the other organs tested. In this patient, Bartonella may have survived
intact within the heart due to persistent intracellular or intravascular infection and periodic dissemination to other tissues.13 Bartonella
has been shown to have higher bacterial loads in the heart and lymph node as compared with other parenchymal tissues,14 which may help to
explain the lack of Bartonella positivity in other tissues tested.14 The cardiac gross and histologic findings of this case are similar to 2
previously reported feline cases of pyogranulomatous myocarditis and diaphragmatic myositis, in which Bartonella were demonstrated with
Warthin‐Starry and Steiner silver stains, Bartonella immunohistochemistry, and PCR.2 Pancardial involvement was not observed in the feline
cases.2 In this case, we were unable to document the presence of Bartonella organisms in 5‐μm‐thick heart sections via Warthin‐Starry silver
stains and Bartonella immunohistochemistry. Multiphoton confocal microscopy uses 50‐μm‐thick floating sections and multiple Bartonella gene
targets, resulting in an increased sensitivity for detecting low copy numbers of Bartonella spp. as previously documented.20, 21 Apparent
clumping or clustering of the bacteria is demonstrated by the confocal microscopy image. These results are similar to the aforementioned
case series of feline myocardial Bartonella infections,2 although bacterial visualization was achieved with different techniques (silver
stains and immunohistochemistry). A possible explanation for the clusters is aggregation of bacteria within a biofilm matrix; however, there
is no evidence to substantiate this possibility. Unfortunately, the exact location of the bacteria (intracellular or extracellular) could
not be determined. With the current case, myocarditis attributed to B. henselae has now been reported in 3 mammalian genera including cats,
dogs, and humans.2, 8, 13, 15, 17, 18, 22 Myocarditis was described in 2 dogs seroreactive to Bartonella vinsonii subspecies berkhoffii
antigens, with PCR amplification in 1 dog; however, Bartonella bacteria were not visualized within the myocardium. Both of these dogs had
concurrent endocarditis with vegetative lesions.8 The cause for the relatively few reported cases of Bartonella myocarditis is unknown and
may be attributable to a truly low incidence, difficulty in establishing a definitive diagnosis, occurrence of occult disease, or
unfamiliarity with this agent as a differential diagnosis.17 Pyogranulomatous inflammation involving a single organ or multiple tissues
occurs with B. henselae in humans14, 16, 18, 23, 24, cats,2, 17 and dogs.14, 15, 18, 22, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31 Natural infection with
B. henselae or B. vinsonii subsp berkhoffii in dogs has been correlated with granulomatous hepatitis, rhinitis, sialoadenitis,
mediastinitis, polyarthritis, lymphadenitis, uveitis, meningitis, encephalitis, and panniculitis,18, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31 the latter 5
of which were observed in this case. Coinfections might contribute to complex interactions among microbial populations, aberrant host immune
response, and atypical disease manifestations as compared to single pathogen infections. The dog in the present report was seroreactive to
A. phagocytophilum and E. canis antigens. Numerous bacterial, fungal, and rickettsial PCR analyses of multiple FFPE tissues were negative.
In a reported series of 12 dogs with cardiac arrhythmias, endocarditis, myocarditis, syncope, conduction defects, or sudden death, 11 were
seroreactive to B. vinsonii subspecies berkhoffi antigens, and 7 were coinfected with other tick‐transmitted pathogens including E. canis,
Babesia canis, Babesia gibsonii, or spotted fever group Rickettsiae.8 Given the breed (American Pitbull terrier) in the present report,
predisposition for Babesia infection is possible,32 although no hemoparasites were identified with CBC evaluation. A recent study
demonstrated B. burgdorferi antigen using immunohistochemistry in 10 Boxer puppies with pyogranulomatous myocarditis.33 In this case, both
serological testing and PCR were negative for Borrelia spp., although immunohistochemistry was not performed. Differential diagnoses for
cardiopulmonary vasculitis in the present case include systemic bacterial, rickettsial, fungal or viral infections, autoimmune diseases;
food or drug reaction; and uremia.34 Interestingly, although vasculitis is not a recognized sequel to Bartonella infection in dogs, B.
henselae has been implicated in reported cases of human vasculitis.17 The source of infection in this case was undetermined. As the dog had
a history of tick exposure, tick transmission is plausible. Alternatively, the wound of unknown origin, exposure to fleas, or other
arthropod vectors may have been the source of infection. Although cat fleas (Ctenocephalides felis) are considered the primary vector, B.
henselae DNA has also been amplified from other arthropods, which might indicate more ecologically diverse modes of transmission.35, 36, 37,
38 In conclusion, this report describes extensive pyogranulomatous inflammation in a dog, including severe cardiac involvement. Clusters of
B. henselae were demonstrated within the myocardium by immunoreactivity with multiphoton laser scanning confocal microscopy. It must be
noted that the conclusions of this study are limited in determining whether Bartonella alone or in combination with other organisms were the
cause of the disseminated inflammatory processes in this patient, as additional immunohistochemical and molecular tests failed to identify
Bartonella or other infectious organisms within the inflamed FFPE tissues. Future studies are required to characterize the relationship
between the host and Bartonella virulence for improved understanding of patterns of disease manifestation and optimization of diagnosis and
treatment. The authors acknowledge Dr. Keith Linder for performing immunohistochemistry; Ms. Brittany Thomas and Dr. Ricardo Maggi in the
NCSU‐CVM Vector Borne Diseases Diagnostic Laboratory for PCR testing; Dr. Christian M. Leutenegger and Dr. Marko Estrada of IDEXX
Laboratories, Inc., West Sacramento, CA 95605 for performing numerous PCR analyses; Ms. Amanda Ramkissoon, Ms. Nanette Ramkissoon, Ms Iveta
Simanska, and IDEXX Laboratories, Inc., Grafton, MA, 01536 for data acquisition, slide preparation, and special stains; Dr. Alexandre
Rousseau for review of clinical data and Ms. Barbara Hegarty for review of the manuscript. Grant support: The author disclosed receipt of
the following financial support for the research, authorship, or publication of this article: The authors received financial support from
the Schiff Foundation and the Caspary Institute of the Animal Medical Center and the Vector Borne Diseases Research Foundation Account at
North Carolina State University College of Veterinary Medicine to support clinical and laboratory diagnostic testing. Conflict of Interest
Declaration: The authors declared no potential conflict of interest with respect to the research, authorship, or publication of this
article. Off‐label Antimicrobial Declaration: Authors declare no off‐label use of antimicrobials. Meloxicam Metacam, Norbrook Laboratories,
Ltd., Lenexa, KS Metronidazole Flagyl, Teva Pharmaceuticals, NJ IDEXX Laboratories, Inc., Westbrook, ME Doxycycline Vibramycin, Pfizer
Pharmaceuticals, New York, NY Metoclopramide Reglan, Teva Pharmaceuticals, Fairfield, NJ Firocoxib Previcox, Merial Ltd., Duluth, GA Qiagen,
Valencia, CA Nanodrop, Wilmington, DE Bioline, Taunton, MA USA IDEXX Laboratories Inc, West Sacramento, CA NCSU‐CVM Vector Borne Diseases
Diagnostic Laboratory, Raleigh, NC Abcam, Cambridge, MA Jackson ImmunoResearch, West Grove, PA
