Direct antiviral agent (DAA) has been the standard of care for patients with hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection. Twelve weeks of
paritaprevir/ritonavir/ombitasvir plus dasabuvir (PROD) with or without ribavirin has shown to have a sustained virological response at
post-treatment 12 weeks (SVR12) rate of >90% in HCV genotype 1 (HCV-1) patients. We report a HCV-1b patient who received only 25 days of
PROD treatment. The patient early terminated treatment due to dengue fever but eventually achieved SVR12. It may attribute to low baseline
viral loads and extraordinarily rapid suppression of HCV after treatment day1. The finding may shed light for possible response-guided-
therapy for so-called ultra-super-responders in the DAA era. Whether the dengue virus, the Flaviviridae family as with HCV, enhanced the HCV
clearance remains unclear and needs further exploration. Direct antiviral agent (DAA) has been the standard of care for patients with
hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection. The current strategy has moved to interferon-free regimens. The mainstream treatment duration are 12 to
24 weeks depending on regimens and patient characteristics. Paritaprevir/ritonavir/ombitasvir plus dasabuvir (PROD) with or without
ribavirin has shown to have a sustained virological response at post-treatment 12 weeks (SVR12) rate of >90% in HCV genotype 1 (HCV-1)
patients. In addition to the development of pangenotypic, high potency DAAs, efforts now are made trying to abbreviate treatment duration to
4 to 8 weeks without compromising efficacy. We herein report an HCV-1b patient who received only 25 days of PROD treatment. The patient
early terminated treatment due to dengue fever but eventually achieved SVR12. The 81-year-old female had the history of chronic HCV
infection for >30 years and co-morbidity of depressive disorder and dementia under regular treatment with Quetiapine 50 mg/day. Due to fear
of adverse events and underlying psychiatric disorder, she was ineligible to pegylated interferon/ribavirin, the current reimbursed regimen
in Taiwan. The genotype and pretreatment viral loads was HCV-1b and 17,019 IU/mL (real-time HCV; Abbott Molecular, Des Plaines IL; detection
limit: 12 IU/mL). The sonography revealed heterogeneous liver parenchyma without splenomegaly and visible collateral vessels. The result of
the acoustic radiation force impulse (ARFI) was 1.3 m/s, which corresponded to fibrosis stage 2. Daily fixed-dose combination of
paritaprevir/ritonavir/ombitasvir (150 mg/100 mg/25 mg) plus twice-daily dasabuvir (250 mg) was administered for the treatment of chronic
HCV infection. Quetiapine was held transiently before antiviral therapy to avoid drug–drug interactions. The HCV ribonucleic acid (RNA)
became rapidly undetectable on day 1, followed by day 7 and day 14 after dosing. Unfortunately, she was admitted due to fever, progressive
thrombocytopenia, and elevated liver enzymes. Dengue fever infection with dengue virus genotype 2 (SYBR Green-based quantitative RT-PCR)
infection was impressed on day 25 of treatment. She received supportive treatment with antipyretics (paracetamol 500 mg/time as needed) and
intravenous fluids supply during hospitalization. PROD were terminated due to severe thrombocytopenia (7000/mm3). The patient discharged
after 7 days supportive inpatient care for dengue fever. Dramatically, the serial testing of serum HCV RNA showed that the patient achieved
SVR4, SVR8, and SVR12 (Table 1). The patients provided written informed consent. The institutional review board in Kaohsiung Medical
University Hospital approved the survey. Serial change of laboratory data and HCV RNA level of the patient. To our knowledge, this is the
first report of DAA prescription that encountered dengue fever, and the patient benefited from HCV eradication only by 4 weeks of all oral
DAA regimens. The current evidence support 12 to 24 weeks of interferon-free DAAs in treating CHC. An 8-week sofosbuvir/ledipasvir is
recommended for naive, noncirrhotic HCV-1 patients with baseline viral loads <8 million IU/mL. As observed in a phase 2b study that 8 weeks
of PROD plus ribavirin had very high SVR rates for naive, noncirrhotic patients of HCV-1b (96%, 23/24) or with low viral loads
(<800,000 IU/mL, 100%, 9/9). The patient did not take any drug with potential drug–drug interaction with PROD. The achievement of SVR to
only 25 days of PROD in this patient may attribute to HCV-1b with low baseline viral loads and extraordinarily rapid suppression of HCV
after treatment Day 1. As with interferon-based therapy, the finding may shed light for possible response-guided-therapy for so-called
ultra-super-responders in the DAA era. The strategy may be particular imperative in resource constrained countries. Notably, viral
interference might exist in the same host. There are reciprocal suppressions between hepatitis B virus and HCV infections. Whether the
dengue virus, the Flaviviridae family as with HCV, enhances the HCV clearance remains unclear and needs further exploration. Abbreviations:
DAA = direct antiviral agents, HCV = hepatitis C virus, PROD = paritaprevir/ritonavir/ombitasvir/dasabuvir, SVR = sustained virological
response. The authors have no funding and conflicts of interest to disclose.
