Correspondence to Dr.　Takahiko Fukuchi, chicco@f.email.ne.jp An 82-year-old Japanese man, who presented with a fever and abdominal pain, was
admitted to our hospital. According to enhanced computed tomography images, the probable diagnosis was abdominal aortic mycotic aneurysm.
Eight sets of blood cultures obtained from the patient were negative. Despite administering treatment with vancomycin and ceftriaxone, the
aneurysm progressively enlarged. He underwent open debridement surgery and in situ replacement because of an aneurysmal rupture. Bacteroides
fragilis was isolated from the tissue culture of the aortic wall. Metronidazole was administered and discontinued without any infection
relapse. When faced with similar cases, rare pathogens should thus be considered as possible causes of mycotic aneurysms. Mycotic aneurysm
could be a fatal infectious disease if not appropriately managed. Previous reports indicate that most of the causative pathogens are Gram-
positive cocci, such as Staphylococcus aureus or Streptococcus pneumoniae, and aerobic Gram-negative bacteria, such as Salmonella spp. (1).
An 82-year-old man was diagnosed with rheumatic arthritis and underwent long-term treatment with methotrexate (during the past 2 years). He
then developed a mycotic aneurysm which had been caused by an anaerobic bacterial infection with Bacteroides (B.) fragilis. As this finding
is extremely rare in terms of mycotic aneurysms, we herein describe the assessment, clinical course, and management of this case. An
82-year-old Japanese man was admitted to our hospital because of a 3-day history of chills and abdominal and back pain. He was diagnosed
with rheumatoid arthritis, for which he had been prescribed methotrexate 4 mg/week 2 years earlier. Additionally, he had a history of
hypertension and angina pectoris. He had no history of tuberculosis, syphilis, or previous abdominal surgery. He denied having any digestive
symptoms such as nausea, diarrhea, or melena. There was no evidence that he had a colonic diverticulum. On admission, he was alert, his
vital signs were blood pressure of 144/84 mmHg, heart rate of 115 beats/min, body temperature of 38.3°C, respiration rate of 16 breaths/min,
and SpO2 of 96% with ambient air. His physical examination revealed pain and tenderness on his right lower abdominal quadrant, but no
pulsatile masses. Laboratory findings showed an elevated white blood cell count of 16,400/μL (neutrophils, 92%; lymphocytes, 2.1%) and
C-reactive protein of 22.39 mg/dL. His serological tests for syphilis were negative. Enhanced computed tomography displayed an abdominal
aortic aneurysm (Figure). Abdominal aortic aneurysm on enhanced computed tomography taken on admission day. According to a clinical
suspicion of a mycotic aneurysm, three sets of blood cultures were obtained on admission, followed by a series of blood cultures taken on 3
consecutive days. Ceftriaxone 2 g intravenously (IV) every 12 h and vancomycin 1 g IV every 24 h were immediately administered for coverage
of Gram-positive cocci and Gram-negative bacilli, such as Salmonella spp. We consulted a cardiovascular surgeon who recommended medical
therapy as the primary therapy, but with continuous monitoring. The six sets of blood cultures obtained from the patient were negative.
Then, vancomycin was discontinued because it was less likely that the infection was caused by Gram-positive bacteria. On the seventh
hospitalization day, he developed a high-grade (40°C) fever. Abdominal ultrasound revealed acalculous cholecystitis. At that time, two
additional sets of blood cultures were obtained, and ceftriaxone was replaced with cefepime 2 g IV every 12 h. On the ninth hospitalization
day, the abdominal aneurysm became enlarged and finally ruptured; therefore, urgent open debridement and in situ replacement were performed.
There was no evidence indicating either intestinal or colonic comorbidity or any abnormal laparoscopic findings. No serious complications
occurred during the surgery. The Gram stain of the necrotic tissue of the aortic wall revealed Gram-negative bacteria suspected to be an
anaerobe; thus, piperacillin/tazobactam 4.5 g IV every 6 h and metronidazole 500 mg PO (per os) three times daily were administered
according to the general antimicrobiogram findings. On the 11th hospitalization day, piperacillin/tazobactam was replaced by
sulbactam/ampicillin 1.5 g IV every 6 h because B. fragilis was isolated from the tissue culture. The bacterial profile indicated that the
strain was sensitive to sulbactam/ampicillin and metronidazole, but resistant to clindamycin. While sulbactam/ampicillin was discontinued on
the 22nd hospitalization day because of a skin eruption, metronidazole was maintained as suppressive therapy. The patient was discharged
after 32 days of hospitalization without any complications. Metronidazole was discontinued after 6 months of treatment because the patient
complained of dizziness. The dizziness disappeared and the patient was free of infection relapse for 3 years after the cessation of
metronidazole. He ultimately died from an unrelated case of pneumonia. We experienced a case of mycotic aneurysm caused by an obligate
anaerobic bacterium, B. fragilis, which was successfully treated with surgical intervention and long-term antimicrobial treatment.
Physicians should be alert when using empiric therapy against common pathogens. We selected vancomycin and ceftriaxone to provide coverage
for the most common pathogens involved in mycotic aneurysms, such as staphylococci (60%) and Salmonella (20-25%) (1). Although the eight
sets of blood cultures obtained during hospitalization were negative, B. fragilis was isolated from the tissue culture of the necrotic
aortic wall that was obtained during surgery. This causative pathogen was not covered by the empirical therapy initially administered;
however, it is practically impossible to provide antimicrobial coverage for all the microorganisms that could potentially cause some disease
in a given patient. Nevertheless, if the clinical course is not progressing as expected after the beginning of antimicrobial therapy,
physicians should consider that the causative pathogen may be a rare or unusual one. While antimicrobial coverage for anaerobes was not
initially achieved by empirical therapy (e.g., carbapenems), no data are available regarding the effect of medical therapy alone (2).
Therefore, whether the patient's clinical course was altered by the management provided remains equivocal. Additionally, the duration of
antimicrobial treatment was debated. Some experts mention that adverse drug reactions to metronidazole therapy are rare, but include central
nervous system toxicity (3). A review article reported that metronidazole treatment over 6 months led to encephalopathy; however, this
adverse event was resolved after the discontinuation of metronidazole (4). In the present case, we decided to continue the treatment for as
long as possible until the onset of any adverse events. It is extremely rare for an anaerobic microorganism to cause a mycotic aneurysm, and
it is also difficult for such microorganisms to be cultured successfully from blood samples. To the best of our knowledge, only 22 cases of
mycotic aneurysm caused by the B. fragilis group have been previously reported in both English and Japanese literature (2,5-16). Of these,
only nine reports confirmed bacteremia secondary to B. fragilis infection (Table). Likewise, in our case, we failed to isolate B. fragilis
from a number of blood cultures. In addition, six patients presented conditions associated with an immunosuppressive state such as diabetes
mellitus, liver cirrhosis, active malignancy, or the use of immunosuppressive agents, similar to our patient. Moreover, six patients had
comorbidity with either the gastrointestinal tract or genital infectious diseases. Features of 23 Patients with Mycotic Aneurysm Caused by
Bacteroides Fragilis Group. NA: not available, ATB: antibiotics, MNZ: metronidazole We then hypothesized that this patient's unusual
infection was probably related to the immunosuppressive status or some colonic comorbidity (17). However, there was no available evidence to
confirm such a hypothesis. Furthermore, as we generally recommend to our patients, we advised the patient to undergo colonoscopy, which he
refused. If there had been a colonic malignancy, it is likely that he would have died from this disease. Thus, we might be able to rule out
the possibility of colonic comorbidity, particularly colon cancer. Previous research reported up to the late 1980s has referred to the
relationship between mycotic aneurysms and endocarditis or a previously known atherosclerotic aneurysm; however, the tendency has become
less common in recent studies. Further research is needed to elucidate this disease. In similar cases, when the results of multiple blood
cultures are negative, but the patient has progressive clinical manifestations of infection, we recommend that clinicians consider rare
pathogens, such as facultative anaerobes, as causative agents.
