Correspondence to Dr.　Koji Nakajima, 0463@imh.jp Hypercalcemia resulting in the elevation of serum parathyroid hormone-related protein
(PTHrP) and suppression of serum PTH was observed in a patient with advanced cholangiocarcinoma (CCC) and multiple lymph node metastases. We
confirmed humoral hypercalcemia of malignancy based on PTHrP-producing CCC. Chemotherapy with gemcitabine and cisplatin could not control
the patient's serum PTHrP levels and the patient was affected with bisphosphonate-refractory hypercalcemia. We administered a single dose of
denosumab, an anti-receptor activator of nuclear factor-kappaB ligand monoclonal antibody, and the patient's serum calcium levels remained
close to the normal range for approximately 3 weeks without additional treatment. Several cases of humoral hypercalcemia of malignancy (HHM)
syndrome caused by parathyroid hormone-related protein (PTHrP)-producing cholangiocarcinoma (CCC) have previously been reported (1-6).
According to these reports, it is difficult to control the serum calcium levels when a reduction in the volume of the PTHrP-producing tumor
is unattainable through therapies such as operation, radiation, or chemotherapy. We herein report a case of refractory HHM syndrome caused
by advanced PTHrP-producing CCC with serum calcium levels that were effectively controlled by the administration of denosumab. A 63-year-old
man was referred to our hospital in June 2015 because of right-sided chest pain and hypercalcemia. He had a history of hypertension without
serious illness. The laboratory data on admission are summarized in Table. His serum calcium level was 13.6 mg/dL and serum inorganic
phosphorus level was 2.3 mg/dL. The whole PTH level was 7 pg/mL (normal range: 9-39 pg/mL). The intact PTHrP level was 49.2 pmol/L (normal
range: <1.1 pmol/L). The carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) level was 31.3 ng/mL (normal range: <5.0 ng/mL), carbohydrate antigen (CA) 19-9
level was 2,139.4 U/mL (normal range: <37.0 U/mL), and α-fetoprotein (AFP) level was 55.5 ng/mL (normal range: <10 ng/mL). A computed
tomography (CT) scan indicated that he had multiple tumors, including one measuring approximately 8 cm in the liver, and multiple lymph node
metastases (Fig. 1A and B). These tumors were only enhanced at the peripheries, but not on the inside. Parathyroid swelling and other
primary tumors (except for the liver) were not detected in either the CT scan or on an echogram. The chest CT scan revealed osteolytic
legions in the thoracic vertebrae (Fig. 1C), but whole body bone scintigraphy was negative. Endoscopic examinations of the upper and lower
gastrointestinal tracts were normal. The histological diagnosis of a biopsy specimen from the left neck metastatic lymph node confirmed
adenocarcinoma (Fig. 2A). An immunohistochemical examination showed supportive patterns for CCC because cytokeratin (CK) 7, CK19 (Fig. 2B),
CK20, and CA19-9 (Fig. 2C) were positive, and thyroid transcription factor-1, napsin A, and hepatocyte were negative. CA19-9 positivity
indicated that the elevation of serum CA19-9 levels was caused by tumor cell production. In addition, tumor cells from the metastatic lymph
node showed positive staining for PTHrP (Fig. 2D). According to the results of imaging and immunohistochemical studies, particularly those
pertaining to CK19, CA19-9, and PTHrP positivity, we diagnosed the patient as having PTHrP-producing CCC, which caused HHM syndrome. Because
his CCC was inoperable, he received chemotherapy with gemcitabine and cisplatin combined with repeated zoledronic acid hydrate after
hydration to improve hypercalcemia during hospitalization (Fig. 3). The multiple liver tumors and metastatic lymph nodes had increased in
size and number (Fig. 1D), and his intact PTHrP levels elevated to 87.2pmol/L even after chemotherapy. His serum calcium levels were only
transiently reduced by combination therapy of zoledronic acid hydrate, elcatonin (Fig. 3), furosemide, and betamethasone. Despite the
administration of zoledronic acid hydrate, his serum calcium levels increased within a short duration. Laboratory Findings on Admission.
AST: asparate aminotransferase, ALT: alanine aminotransferase, LDH: lactate dehydrogenase, ALP: alkaline phosphatase, γ-GTP: gamma-glutamyl
transpeptidase, BUN: blood urea nitrogen, Ca: calcium, IP: inorganic phosphorus, CEA: carcinoembryonic antigen, CA19-9: carbohydrate antigen
19-9, AFP: α-fetoprotein, 1,25 (OH)2D3: 1,25-dihydroxycholecalciferol CT scans taken on admission and after chemotherapy. An abdominal CT
scan taken at admission (A) revealed multiple liver tumors and lymph node metastases (arrows). A neck CT scan (B) revealed multiple lymph
node metastases (arrows). A chest CT scan (C) revealed osteolytic changes in the thoracic vertebrae (arrow). An abdominal CT scan taken
after chemotherapy (D). Liver tumors increased in size (*) and number (+) even after chemotherapy. Histological examination of the
metastatic neck lymph node. Moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma showing a papillotubular structure (A). Immunostaining for CK19 (B) and
CA19-9 (C) was positive. Furthermore, tumor cells were positive for PTHrP (D). Magnification, 200×. Clinical course of this case. We focused
on the serum calcium levels (closed circles) and inorganic phosphorus levels (open circles). Arrows indicate the administration of
zoledronic acid hydrate, gemcitabine, cisplatin, and denosumab. Closed squares indicate the durations for the administration of elcatonin or
sodium phosphate. CDDP: cisplatin, Gem: gemcitabine, ZAH: zoledronic acid hydrate Consequently, we administered a single dose of anti-
receptor activator of nuclear factor-kappaB ligand (RANKL) monoclonal antibody, a subcutaneous injection of 120 mg denosumab, after
obtaining his informed consent, although we thought HHM syndrome in this case was caused by PTHrP-producing CCC rather than local osteolytic
hypercalcemia (LOH). After the administration of denosumab, his serum calcium levels were controlled at a level almost below 10.5 mg/dL for
3 weeks, which was achieved without the additional administration of bisphosphonates, although his serum inorganic phosphorus levels were
consistently decreasing. He was administered 10 mmol sodium phosphate as 310 mg inorganic phosphorus daily (Fig. 3). The patient eventually
died of disease progression on the 89th day after admission. The most common features of HHM syndrome are hypercalcemia associated with the
overexpression of PTHrP accompanied by suppressed PTH secretion. HHM associated with PTHrP may occur in patients with malignancies
originating from various tissues (7). A CT scan revealed multiple liver tumors and lymph node metastases, but no other primary tumor in this
case. The pattern of enhancement of liver tumors was quite different from hepatocellular carcinoma (Fig. 1A). Roskams et al. reported that
PTHrP is a useful marker for CCC, particularly in the differential diagnosis of hepatocellular carcinoma and metastatic adenocarcinoma (8).
The tumor cells from metastatic lymph node had features typical of adenocarcinoma (Fig. 2A) and stained positive for CK7, CK19 (Fig. 2B),
CA19-9 (Fig. 2C), and PTHrP (Fig. 2D), which suggested CCC. The CT scan also indicated that he had osteolytic legions in the thoracic
vertebrae (Fig. 1C), but whole body bone scintigraphy was negative. These data suggested that abnormal PTHrP secretion from tumor cells
mainly caused HHM syndrome rather than LOH in this case. We concluded that HHM syndrome occurred because of PTHrP-producing CCC. The
prognosis of CCC is poor. The median survival time ranges from 2 to 15 months in trials using combination systemic chemotherapy and
neoadjuvant chemoradiation in unresectable cases (9). HHM syndrome is one of the most clinically significant paraneoplastic syndromes
because controlling the serum calcium levels are very difficult and an important matter in the quality of life for patients who have a poor
prognosis. Most patients with HHM syndrome respond favorably to bisphosphonates when the drugs are preceded by saline hydration, however, a
significant number of patients remain hypercalcemic or attain only transient effects after these treatments (10). Matsumoto et al. reported
a case of combined hepatocellular-cholangiocarcinoma producing PTHrP that required palliative mass reduction surgery. The aim is to reduce
the serum PTHrP levels and control the serum calcium levels because hypercalcemia is medically difficult to manage (1). In our case, liver
tumors and lymph node metastases increased in size and number (Fig. 1A and D), and the serum PTHrP levels elevated even further after
chemotherapy (Fig. 3). On the other hand, there were no changes in the osteolytic legions in his thoracic vertebrae on the CT scan. In the
bone, PTH or PTHrP acts on PTH/PTHrP receptors on osteoblast precursors to increase the production of macrophage colony-stimulating factor
(MCS-F) and RANKL and decrease the production of osteoprotegerin (OPG). MCS-F and RANKL stimulate the production of osteoclasts and increase
the activity of mature osteoclasts by binding to the receptor RANK. OPG blocks the interaction between RANKL and RANK receptor (11). Thus,
in HHM syndrome, the inhibition of the increased interaction between RANKL and RANK receptor by anti-RANKL antibody, instead of a decreased
OPG, may suppress bone resorption and hypercalcemia. The inhibition of RANKL has been reported to cause greater suppression of bone
resorption and hypercalcemia compared with bisphosphonates in two models of HHM (10). Therefore, the administration of anti-RANKL antibody
should thus be the first choice of treatment for HHM syndromes. There have been three case reports on the administration of denosumab, an
anti-RANKL antibody, for refractory hypercalcemia with HHM syndrome caused by PTHrP production in nonparathyroidal malignancy. In these
reports, denosumab was indicated to be effective for bisphosphonate-refractory hypercalcemia, although hypocalcemia was one of the main
adverse effects and careful monitoring of the calcium levels was required (12-14). In our case, the serum calcium level was only transiently
controlled by bisphosphonates and the serum calcium levels increased within a short duration (Fig. 3). Because denosumab may suppress bone
resorption and improve refractory hypercalcemia, we administered it, although we thought that HHM syndrome in our case was caused by PTHrP-
producing CCC rather than LOH. After the administration of denosumab, the serum calcium levels of this patient were almost controlled to a
normal range without the additional administration of bisphosphonates. The pathogenesis for the inhibition of phosphate transport via
specific sodium-phosphate (NaPi) cotransporters on renal tubules by PTH or PTHrP is independent of RANKL (14). In this case, we had to
supply phosphate even after the reduction in the serum calcium levels by the administration of denosumab because the serum inorganic
phosphorus levels were consistently decreasing (Fig. 3). In conclusion, we herein reported a case of HHM syndrome caused by PTHrP-secreting
CCC and reviewed the previously administered treatments, which inhibited RANKL in patients with HHM syndrome. The anti-RANKL monoclonal
antibody, denosumab, should therefore be a first-line treatment after hydration for HHM syndrome caused by PTHrP, when reduction of PTHrP is
unattainable through other anti-tumor therapies. We thank Mr. Takahiro Iwata and Mr. Masanobu Momose for their expert technical assistance
on PTHrP staining and other immunohistological staining of the tumor specimens obtained at biopsy.
