Correspondence to Dr.　Atsushi Kitazawa, atsukitaaq@gmail.com We report a case of acquired factor V inhibitors (AFVIs) in a patient with end-
stage renal disease receiving warfarin therapy for atrial fibrillation. A 72-year-old Japanese man was admitted to our hospital complaining
of tarry stools and abdominal pain. The laboratory findings revealed eosinophilia (52.1%), prolonged activated partial thromboplastin time
(APTT) (98 s), PT (84 s), a factor V (FV) activity of <3%, and an FV inhibitor level of 6 Bethesda units/mL. After administration of
prednisolone was started, his coagulation findings improved. However, his renal failure progressed, and he ultimately required chronic
hemodialysis. This is the first case of AFVIs in a patient starting hemodialysis for end-stage renal disease. Acquired coagulation factor
deficiency is a rare autoimmune disease in which inhibitory autoantibodies to coagulation factors are produced. These antibodies reduce the
activity of coagulation factors, leading to a bleeding tendency. Most autoantibodies are to factor VIII (F8), referred to as acquired
hemophilia A, and occur at a frequency of 1:100 million people. In Japan, the incidence of acquired factor V inhibitors (AFVIs) has been
reported as 1:50 relative to acquired hemophilia A (1). A 72-year-old man with end-stage renal disease (resulting from nephrosclerosis) was
admitted to our hospital with fatigue, abdominal pain, and tarry stools in the middle of September. His medical history included chronic
atrial fibrillation (AF), congestive heart failure with massive aortic regurgitation (AR), and peptic ulcer disease. He was taking the
following chronic medications: warfarin, carvedilol, amlodipine, olmesartan, febuxostat, furosemide, and lansoprazole. A physical
examination at the time of admission revealed pale-colored conjunctivae and epigastric tenderness. The laboratory findings on admission are
summarized in Table 1. In brief, the eosinophil count was markedly increased (52.1%), and the hemoglobin level was reduced (9.7 g/dL). The
prothrombin time-international normalized ratio (PT-INR) was increased to 7.27, but the D-dimer value (0.45 μg/mL) was within the normal
range. A chest X-ray showed cardiomegaly, with a cardiothoracic ratio of 66% (Fig. 1). A computed tomography (CT) scan of his abdomen showed
bilateral renal atrophy and a mass, 38 mm in diameter, in the right kidney (Fig. 2). Laboratory Findings on Admission. A chest X-ray on
admission showed cardiomegaly, with a cardiothoracic ratio of 66%. Abdominal computed tomography on admission revealing bilateral renal
atrophy and a mass, 38 mm in diameter, in the right kidney. The patient's clinical course is illustrated in Fig. 3. Initially, warfarin
toxicity was suspected. Thus, the warfarin was stopped, and vitamin K was administered intravenously, with a subsequent temporary
improvement in his PT values. Although upper and lower gastrointestinal tract endoscopy was performed, no obvious source of bleeding was
identified. However, on Day 14 of admission, a CT scan of the chest showed bilateral massive infiltrative shadows in the right middle and
lower lobes of the lung, suggesting an alveolar hemorrhage. On Day 15, the PT-INR value had increased to 5.76, and the activated partial
thromboplastin time (APTT) was markedly prolonged (>180 s). His findings for lupus anticoagulant diluted Russell's viper venom time (dRVVT)
were positive (>1.33, normal range: 0-1.3 s), and his level of anti-β2-glycoprotein 1 (aB2GP1) IgG antibody was 3.2 U/mL (normal range: <3
U/mL) and anti-cardiolipin (aCL) IgG antibody was 38 U/mL (normal range: <10 U/mL). A plasma cross-mixing test was then performed and
revealed no factor deficiency, but suggested a delayed-type inhibitor pattern (Fig. 4). We suspected acquired hemophilia and carried out
tests to detect the coagulation factor activity and inhibitor presence (Table 2). The activity of factor V (FV) was quite low (<3%). The
specific inhibitor for FV was present, with a titer of 6 Bethesda units/mL (BU/mL). Thus, prednisolone was initiated, starting at a dose of
60 mg/day (1.0 mg/kg/day). The patient's eosinophilia soon improved. The findings from his coagulation studies improved markedly, but his
renal failure progressed with oliguria, and he ultimately required chronic hemodialysis. Clinical course. Horizontal axis: hospital days,
APTT: activated partial thromboplastin time (s), PT-INR: international normalized ratio of prothrombin time, Hb: hemoglobin (g/dL), Vit K:
Vitamin K (Menatetrenone), PSL: prednisolone (mg/day), FFP: Fresh frozen plasma, RCC-LR: red cells concentrates-leukocytes reduced Cross-
mixing test. Plasma from the patient and normal were mixed at various rations after incubation for 2 h at 37˚C. It demonstrated no factor
deficiency but suggested a delayed-type inhibitor pattern. Coagulation Factor Assay. By Day 34 of admission, the findings from his
coagulation studies had normalized (PT-INR: 1.22, APTT: 30.1 s), so an arteriovenous fistula was surgically created for ongoing
hemodialysis. On Day 40, the FV activity increased to 61%, and the test for FV inhibitors was negative. Prednisolone was thus tapered to 50
mg/day. On Day 42, capsule endoscopy revealed a wide area of redness and erosion in the small intestine. This was considered to be the
source of the bleeding that resulted in the tarry stool and anemia. The patient had experienced pain in both upper limbs on Day 15 and
thereafter had some numbness in the upper and lower limbs. A nerve conduction test showed multiple mononeuropathies. Once prednisolone was
started, the upper limb pain improved, although the numbness remained. The prednisolone dosage was gradually reduced. The levels of the
coagulation markers remained stable, and the FV inhibitors remained undetectable. The patient was discharged after 91 days in the hospital.
The prednisolone dosage was tapered to 7.5 mg/day. One year later, the prednisolone had been tapered to 1 mg/day, the FV inhibitors remained
undetectable, and he continued hemodialysis without complications. AFVI was first reported by Hörder et al. in 1955. According to a
systematic review by Franchini, by 2010, there had been 159 reported cases, 70 of which were associated with previous exposure to topical
bovine thrombin. In the remainder of cases, the underlying causes were reported to be autoimmune (13%), tumor-associated (22%), and
antibacterial drug-induced, notably β-lactam antibiotics (42%); 21% were classified as idiopathic (2). In the present case, several causes
were considered, including tumor-associated (renal cell carcinoma was suspected, given the kidney mass identified on CT), warfarin,
eosinophilia-related, and autoimmune (aCL-positive). More than one year later, the kidney mass had neither increased in size nor
metastasized, and the AFVIs did not recur. Given that we were unable to find any previous reports of renal cell carcinoma as a cause of
AFVIs, we believe the renal mass was unlikely to be the underlying cause of the AFVI in the present patient. Four cases of AFVI related to
warfarin therapy have been reported, but none identified the cause (3-6). In the present case, despite a two-week interval between the
withdrawal of warfarin and the initiation of prednisolone, the coagulation abnormalities and eosinophilia did not improve spontaneously on
withdrawal of the warfarin. In addition, 8 days before warfarin was started, the proportion of eosinophils had already increased to 15%.
Thus, whether or not warfarin was the underlying cause is unclear. All three cases of acquired coagulation factor inhibitor associated with
eosinophilia had FVIs (7-9). Interestingly, these three cases also suffered from kidney diseases. One case was a maintenance dialysis
patient, and the other two had membranous nephropathy, which is caused by immune complex formation in the glomerulus. The present case had
bilateral renal atrophy, and from the clinical course, he was considered to have nephrosclerosis, but further details were unclear, as renal
biopsy had not been performed. In addition to marked eosinophilia, our patient also was positive for antiphospholipid antibodies (aCL and
aB2GP1) and had elevated serum IgG levels and multiple mononeuropathies, suggesting the presence of an immunological disorder. However, the
diagnostic criteria for systemic lupus erythematosus, eosinophilic granulomatous vasculitis, and polyarteritis nodosa were not met. The
relationship between renal disease or renal failure and AFVIs is unclear for rare diseases, but some as-yet-unknown immunological mechanism
causing eosinophilia might be involved in the production of the FV inhibitors. The mucosal erosion observed in the present patient was
confined to the small intestine and not biopsied. A diagnosis of eosinophilic gastroenteritis was suggested, given the eosinophilia,
elevated serum IgG levels, diarrhea, and the wide range of small bowel erosions. Further, the patient's gastrointestinal symptoms (abdominal
pain, tarry stool, and diarrhea) resolved with steroid therapy. With the use of capsule endoscopy and double-balloon enteroscopy spreading,
reports have begun to appear in the literature of eosinophilic enteritis localized to the small intestine (10-12). There is no well-
established treatment for AFVIs, but immunosuppressive therapy (including corticosteroids and cyclophosphamide), intravenous
immunoglobulins, and plasmapheresis are reported to be effective, similar to the treatment for acquired hemophilia (2). Some reports suggest
that rituximab is effective in patients presenting with severely bleeding diathesis (13-16). The findings from the cross-mixing test
provided a clue to the diagnosis in this particular case, prompting us to start treatment with prednisolone, which rapidly improved the
patient's coagulation abnormalities. Given that the coagulation factor activity and inhibitor presence take a long time to evaluate, the
cross-mixing test is helpful in obtaining an early diagnosis. Although there have been two reported cases of AFVIs occurring in patients on
maintenance hemodialysis (7,17), this is the first case of AFVIs in a patient initiating hemodialysis for end-stage renal disease.
