Down syndrome (DS) is the most common chromosome disorder in live born infants, affecting several body systems, but usually sparing skeletal
muscles. We present the case of a child with coexistence of DS and dystrophinopathy. Only 1 similar case has been reported so far. An
8-year-old boy with DS had a history of incidental finding of increased serum creatine kinase levels up to 1775 U/L (normal values
38–174 U/L). He presented no delay in motor development; at the neurological examination, no muscle weakness or fatigability was detected in
2 different evaluations performed over a 6-month period. Skeletal muscle biopsy revealed marked dystrophic changes with patchy
immunostaining for dystrophin. The Duchenne muscular dystrophy gene was screened for deletions by multiplex polymerase chain reaction, but
no mutations were found. Sequence analysis of the Duchenne muscular dystrophy gene revealed a splice-site mutation c.1812+1G>A in intron 15
and confirmed a diagnosis of Becker muscular dystrophy. The patient has started a specific physiotherapy that avoided any deterioration in
motor development and muscular wasting. A multidisciplinary follow-up was initiated. The genetician that followed the patient for DS was
supported by the neurologist, the physiotherapist, the pulmonologist, and the cardiologist. This peculiar “double trouble” case exemplifies
the value of careful clinical evaluation and adequate clinical experience to identify the concomitance of 2 different genetic syndromes in
the same patient, and it points out the significance of muscular strength assessment in DS patients to make the most correct prognosis, and,
consequently, to organize the best long-term care. Down syndrome (DS, OMIM #190685) is 1 of the most common chromosome abnormalities in
humans, occurring in about 1 per 1000 babies born each year. It is caused by triplicate state (trisomy) of all or of a critical portion of
chromosome 21, usually by nondisjunction. It is characterized mainly by peculiar facial features, physical growth delay, mild to moderate
intellectual disability, high rate of congenital heart defects and hypothyroidism, high risk for leukemia and lower, but significant rates
of gastrointestinal malformations, which often require surgery within the first days to weeks of life. Other surgical conditions that occur
at higher rates include Hirschsprung disease, polydactyly, cleft palate, and cataracts. Mutations in Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD) gene,
which encodes the protein dystrophin and is located on chromosome X, cause a spectrum of muscle diseases affecting male individuals and
named dystrophinopathies. Two main forms are recognized, namely Duchenne and Becker muscular dystrophies (DMD and BMD, OMIM #310200 and
#300376, respectively). DMD is the most common form of inherited muscle disease in childhood, with an estimated incidence of 1 in 3500 born
males. It presents in early childhood and it is rapidly progressive, with affected children being wheelchair-bound by 12 years of age. BMD
is a generally milder and more variable form of dystrophinopathy, with an incidence of 1 in 18,518 male births. Indeed, BMD phenotype can
range from asymptomatic individuals with increased serum creatine kinase (CK) levels and muscle cramps, to more invalidating forms with
severe muscle weakness and/or dilated cardiomyopathy. BMD patients usually remain ambulatory into their 20s. The Duchenne phenotype is
usually due to a mutation resulting in a shift of the reading frame of the mRNA transcript, leading to a truncated gene product. In BMD, the
mutation does not affect the reading frame; rather it results in the synthesis of shorter, but partly functional dystrophin molecules. We
describe a peculiar case presenting a combination of chromosome 21 trisomy and in-frame DMD gene deletion. The patient has typical features
of both DS and BMD. An 8-year-old boy with DS had been referred to us by an attentive neurologist for recurrent findings of increased serum
CK levels. The patient was found to have an incidental elevation of serum transaminases that had led to a gastroenterological evaluation at
around 6 years of age. During the same year, he was found to have elevated serum CK levels, up to 1775 U/L (normal values 38–174 U/L),
confirmed in several serial assessments. Family history was negative for inherited diseases. Medical history was negative for delay in motor
development and he did not show progressive muscular wasting. At the neurological examination, he showed characteristic DS facial features,
but no muscle weakness or fatigability were detected in 2 different evaluations performed over a 6-month period. Electromyography findings
revealed immediately a myopathic pattern. Because of the peculiarity and complexity of the clinical presentation, after the approval of the
Ethics Committee of Fondazione IRCCS Ca’ Granda Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico and upon parental signature of written informed consent, the
child underwent a biceps brachial skeletal muscle biopsy that showed moderate dystrophic alterations consisting of scattered rounded opaque
fibers, rare necrotic fibers undergoing phagocytosis, and basophilic muscle fibers. Immunocytochemical studies of dystrophin using DYS-1
(rod domain) and DYS-2 (C-terminus) monoclonal antibodies demonstrated normal immunoreactivity. DYS-3 (N-terminus) antibody showed weak
immunostaining at the sarcolemma and a few dystrophin-negative fibers. Normal sarcolemmal immunostaining was observed with the antibodies
against caveolin, and α and γ-sarcoglycan. DNA analyses for DMD/BMD were performed after written informed consent. The DMD gene was screened
for deletions by multiplex polymerase chain reaction, but no mutations were found. Sequence analysis of the DMD gene revealed a splice-site
mutation c.1812+1G>A in intron 15. The mutation results in exon 15 skipping, a change that would leave the reading frame intact. The patient
has started a specific physiotherapy that avoided any deterioration in motor development and muscular wasting. No other medical or surgical
therapies were required. As soon as the diagnosis was performed, a multidisciplinary follow-up was initiated. The genetician that followed
the patient for DS was supported by the neurologist, the physiotherapist, the pulmonologist, and the cardiologist. Figure 1 represents the
skeletal muscle biopsy that permitted the diagnosis. Skeletal muscle biopsy. Gomori trichrome (A, B) and H&E (C) staining showed typical
histologic changes of muscular dystrophy (see the txt for description). Immunohistochemistry of dystrophin: DYS-1 (rod domain) (D) and DYS-2
(C-terminus) (E) were normal; DYS-3 (F) (N-terminus) antibody showed weak sarcolemmal immunostaining and a few dystrophin negative fibers.
As soon as the results of the skeletal muscle biopsy were available, molecular genetic analysis was performed and documented a splice-site
mutation c.1812+1G>A in intron 15. Figure 2 shows the molecular genetic analysis of the cDNA DMD gene, whereas Fig. 3 reports molecular
genetic analysis of the mRNA DMD gene. Molecular genetic analysis of the cDNA DMD gene. BMD exon/intron 15, base change c,1812+1G>A. BMD =
Becker muscular dystrophy, DMD = Duchenne muscular dystrophy. Molecular genetic analysis of the mRNA DMD gene. Base change c.1812+1G>A leads
to a splice site mutation in intron 15, resulting in exon 15 deletion. DMD = Duchenne muscular dystrophy. We report the case of a 8-year-old
boy with coinheritance of DS and BMD. An increase in CK serum levels is not a typical feature of DS, although a significant increase in CK
values is reported in obese DS patients compared with nonobese ones. Our patient, who had both high serum CK levels and a myopathic
electromyography pattern, underwent skeletal muscular biopsy, which revealed a weak Dys 3 immunostain compatible with a diagnosis of BMD.
The diagnosis was confirmed by DMD gene analysis, which revealed an intronic splice-site mutation causing exon 15 skipping and keeping the
reading frame intact. The typical BMD great phenotype variability may account for the normal muscular strength in the patient. In DS
patients, considerable evidence underlines the common presence of reduced muscle strength, only partially explained by degree of
intellectual disability. Also, Cowley et al showed lower expression of cytochrome-c oxidase in Soleus muscles of DS murine model, Ts65Dn,
our patient, however, has normal COX activity. Despite these data, neuromuscular anomalies are very uncommon in DS, although DS has been
previously described in 2 independent patients affected by DMD and BMD, respectively. The concomitant presence of DS and BMD in a single
patient is logically assumed to be coincidental. The incidence of DS is 1 per 1000 birth, and the frequency of BMD is estimated to be 1 in
18,518 male births. However, the possibility of being affected with 2 relatively common inherited genetic conditions, although rare, should
be considered when findings are incoherent with the primary diagnosis. Although the genetic etiology is different, dystrophinopathies have
been reported in males with chromosomal abnormalities, more specifically DMD in Turner and Klinefelter syndrome, and BMD in Noonan syndrome.
The rarity of this disease association underlines the value of adequate clinical experience; even more, it emphasizes how a
multidisciplinary approach is essential in managing and treating these patients. Because reduction in muscle strength interferes with
everyday activities and limits opportunities for independent living, it is extremely important to assess DS patients’ muscle strength and to
detect any genetic comorbidities to make the most correct prognosis and, consequently, organize the best long-term care. We were happy to
identify the cause of the increase in CK in our child and we are confident in the multidisciplinary follow-up that has been started. The
patient's parents provided their written informed consent for the publication of this study. The authors wish to thank “The Biobank of
skeletal muscle, peripheral nerve, DNA and cell cultures” (Project GTB12001E) members of the Telethon Network of Genetic Biobanks (Project
GTB12001) and the Eurobiobank Network for providing us with some specimens. They also acknowledge the “Associazione Amici del Centro Dino
Ferrari, University of Milan.” All the persons in these Networks gave their consent to be named. The study was supported by a grant from the
Italian Ministry of Health (Fondazione IRCCS Ca’ Granda Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Ricerca Corrente Grant 2015—Neuromuscular Diseases
Unit). Abbreviations: BMD = Becker muscular dystrophy, CK = creatine kinase, DMD = Duchenne muscular dystrophy, DS = Down syndrome. The
authors report no conflicts of interest.
