Granulocytic sarcoma (GS) is defined as leukemia infiltration in any organ other than the bone marrow. GS rarely occurs in the pancreas.
Here, we present the first report of GS in the pancreas on 18F-fluorodexyglucose positron emission tomography/computed tomography (18F-FDG
PET/CT). A 19-year-old male patient with acute myeloid leukemia received a human leukocyte antigen-haploidentical stem cell transplant as a
second transplant while in second complete remission. After a second stem cell transplant, obstructive pancreatitis accompanied by a mass in
the pancreatic head was observed. FDG-PET/CT revealed abnormal activity in the head of the pancreas and the skin in the patient's left
breast area. Pathological examination demonstrated relapsed acute myeloid leukemia in both the lesions. This is the first report showing the
18F-FDG PET/CT findings of GS in the pancreas. 18F-FDG PET/CT may help determine the stage of GS. Granulocytic sarcoma (GS) is defined as
leukemia infiltration in any organ other than the bone marrow. GS of the pancreas is rare presentation of acute myeloid leukemia relapse.
Sometimes, it occurs after allogeneic transplantation, presumably reflecting weaknesses of graft-versus-leukemia effect in the
extramedullary tissues. Here, we present the first report of GS in the pancreas on 18F-fluorodexyglucose positron emission
tomography/computed tomography (18F-FDG PET/CT). A 19-year-old male patient with acute myeloid leukemia received a human leukocyte antigen-
haploidentical stem cell transplant as a second transplant while in second complete remission. The conditioning regimen consisted of total
body irradiation, melphalan, fludarabine, and cytarabine. Five months after the transplant, he developed epigastric and back pain, and a
skin tumor appeared on the abdomen. Laboratory analyses showed elevated amylase (935 U/L) and lipase (2547 U/L) levels. CT revealed
distension of the Wirsung duct and swelling of the pancreas. Diffusion-weighted magnetic resonance imaging demonstrated restricted diffusion
in a portion of the pancreatic head, corresponding to a pancreatic mass. Abdominal skin biopsy and endoscopic ultrasound-guided fine needle
aspiration of the pancreatic mass revealed tumor cells positive for the myeloid marker myeloperoxidase and CD34, as determined by
immunohistological examination. Furthermore, 18F-FDG PET/CT was also performed. Although the blood glucose level was not measured before the
examination, in spite of his steroid diabetes, 3 focal lesions (Fig. 1A) with moderate metabolic activity were observed in the pancreatic
head (standardized uptake value maximum [SUV max], 3.5) (Fig. 1B, CT; C, PET; D, fusion), in the skin in his left breast area (SUV max, 2.6)
(Fig. 1E, CT; F, PET; G, fusion), and in the abdominal skin (SUV max, 1.5). A diagnosis of relapsed acute myeloid leukemia involving the
pancreas and the skin was made, and salvage chemotherapy was consequently initiated. Imaging findings on 18F-fluorodexyglucose positron
emission tomography/computed tomography. Three focal lesions (A) with moderate metabolic activity were observed in the pancreatic head (,
computed tomography ; , positron emission tomography ; , fusion), in the skin in his left breast area (, CT; , PET; , fusion), and in the
abdominal skin. This is the first report showing the 18F-FDG PET/CT findings of a GS in the pancreas. The differential diagnosis between
pancreatic GS and other diseases using 18F-FDG PET/CT is limited when the tumor is accompanied by obstructive pancreatitis. GS is defined as
leukemia infiltration in any organ other than the bone marrow. GS develops in 9% of patients with acute myeloid leukemia and occurs in 5% to
7% of patients undergoing allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplantation as a relapse. Only approximately 20 cases of pancreatic GS have
been reported. In almost all cases, CT and/or magnetic resonance imaging were performed, whereas the 18F-FDG PET/CT findings remain unknown.
The reported 18F-FDG PET uptake of GS ranges between SUVmax 2.6 and 9.7, which may overlap with that in other pancreatic cancers and
inflammatory responses. Because of these overlaps, it may be difficult to distinguish GS from other diseases if uptake is detected in the
pancreas. In our case, obstructive pancreatitis accompanied GS, possibly making it more difficult to distinguish malignancy from an
inflammatory response. Moreover, the uptake in the pancreas might have been decreased by steroid diabetes in our case. Thus, while 18F-FDG
PET/CT may be useful to detect GS in the early stage, determine the stage, and evaluate the treatment response, if GS develops in the
pancreas, especially when accompanied by pancreatitis, 18F-FDG PET/CT shows limited usefulness for the diagnosis. Accordingly, it is
necessary to perform biopsy to confirm the diagnosis, similar to that performed in our case. In conclusion, this is the first report showing
the 18F-FDG PET/CT findings of GS in the pancreas; 18F-FDG PET/CT may help determine the stage of GS. Informed consent was signed by the
patient for the publication of this report and related images. Abbreviations: 18F-FDG PET/CT = 18F-fluorodexyglucose positron emission
tomography/computed tomography; CT = computed tomography; GS = granulocytic sarcoma; SUV = standardized uptake value maximum. The authors
have no funding and conflicts of interest to disclose.
