Spontaneous Coronary Artery Dissection (SCAD) has prevalence of 0.2 to 1.1% of the total angiograms performed for Acute Coronary Syndrome
(ACS)1,2 and mostly affects young women.3 The etiology is not fully known,2,3 but the term "spontaneous" excludes all dissections associated
with interventions or trauma.1 Treatment varies from the conservative approach to revascularization,4 with a favorable long-term prognosis.5
This study aimed to assess the characteristics, the clinical presentation, therapeutic approach and follow-up of cases of SCAD with ACS
presentation during a period of 7 years. This is a descriptive and retrospective analysis of patients admitted to a Cardiology Service for 7
consecutive years, between 2008 and 2014, with a diagnosis of ACS due to SCAD. The diagnosis of SCAD was attained in the presence of
angiographic characteristics obtained through coronary angiography. Data were obtained from medical records of hospitalization and
subsequent consultations. Of the 4,600 patients admitted with ACS at the Cardiology Service, 17 patients (0.4%) had SCAD as the cause. The
mean age was 51 ± 9 years; ten patients were women, of which 5 were in the postmenopausal period. SCAD may have been related to oral
contraceptive use in three cases, intense exercises in one case, and smoking in eight cases. All patients had a diagnosis of acute
myocardial infarction (AMI), 59% with ST-Segment Elevation (STEMI) and 41% with non-ST-segment elevation (NSTEMI). Most progressed with
Killip class I (94%), with a median troponin I value of 10 [P25 3] ng / dL. Left ventricular systolic function was preserved in 82% and only
one patient developed severe systolic dysfunction. During hospitalization, which lasted 10 ± 5 days, all patients underwent coronary
angiography (Figure 1), with only one artery with SCAD being identified in each patient. All SCDs were classified as type 2 angiographic
variant. The Anterior Descending artery (ADA) was the most frequently affected (seven patients), followed by the the right coronary artery
(RCA) (five patients), while four patients had dissection of the circumflex artery (Cx) and one patient had dissection of the left main
coronary artery (LMCA). Figure 1 Coronary angiography images showing spontaneous coronary dissections diagnosed in the context of acute
coronary syndrome. Coronary angiography images showing spontaneous coronary dissections diagnosed in the context of acute coronary syndrome.
Four patients had complications during the hospital stay: one patient with an episode of atrial fibrillation, three with reinfarction and
one with associated pericarditis. All reinfarction cases were submitted to coronary angiography, which showed progression of the SCAD with
occlusion of the distal vessel; a conservative approach was instituted. All hospitalized patients that had, at the catheterization,
Thrombolysis In Myocardial Infarction (TIMI) flow 3 in the affected artery were treated with medical therapy: dual antiplatelet therapy,
heparin and statins. One patient underwent angioplasty with bare-metal stent implant for occlusion of the artery showing dissection (CD). In
three other cases, concomitant atherosclerosis was identified; two patients underwent angioplasty with covered stent implantation and one
underwent surgical revascularization. At the median follow-up of 52 [P25 30] months, only one patient had a new atherosclerotic AMI
documented by coronary angiography. Of the patients who underwent control coronary angiography (47%), all showed dissection resolution; 76%
of the patients, asymptomatic, were submitted to non-invasive ischemia testing (nine performed stress test; four, perfusion scintigraphy -
three of which also performed stress test and one patient underwent cardiac MRI perfusion), which was negative. During the follow-up no
deaths were recorded and no patient developed heart failure (Table 1). General characteristics of clinical presentation and follow-up AMI:
acute myocardial infarction; LVF: left ventricular function; M: male; F: female; STEMI: acute myocardial infarction with ST-segment
elevation; RCA: right coronary artery; PCI: percutaneous coronary intervention; NSTEMI: acute myocardial infarction without ST segment
elevation; F: female; OCs: oral contraceptives; CX: circumflex artery; AF: atrial fibrillation; ADA: anterior descending artery; CABG:
coronary artery bypass grafting; LMCA: left main coronary artery. The SCAD often affects young individuals between 35 and 40 years of age.5
Approximately 70% are women and in 30% of cases, the SCAD is related to pregnancy.3 It has a broad clinical presentation spectrum.5 Its
etiology/pathophysiology is not completely understood, but it is related to atherosclerotic disease; the peripartum period; connective
tissue disease; vasculitis; smoking; oral contraceptives; SAH; cocaine use; coronary vasospasm; cyclosporine and intense exercise. Recently,
a close association has been identified between SCAD and the presence of fibromuscular dysplasia, and, therefore, its presence should be
ruled out.2,3,6-8 It can affect one or more coronary arteries, being more frequent in the ADA.3 RCA dissections are more common in men,
while left main coronary artery dissections are more common in women.9 Its identification is often difficult,10 and a high degree of
clinical suspicion is essential. The use of complementary techniques such as the intravascular ultrasound (IVUS) and coronary computed
tomography (CT) contributes to a better identification and classification of SCAD. Coronary CT is the most sensitive technique for the
diagnosis of SCAD due to a higher resolution, but lower penetration than the IVUS. Although the coronary angiotomography allows the
assessment of atherosclerotic lesions, it has limited usefulness in SCAD due to its low spatial resolution.3,10,11 Treatment varies
according to the site of dissection, the number of involved vessels, distal flow, the hemodynamic status of the patient and the possibility
of intervention.4 In stable patients with normal coronary flow, the treatment is preferably the conservative approach.4,5 Angioplasty is
indicated only in cases of ischemia and one-vessel disease, due to the high risk of propagation of the dissection related to the
procedure;4,12 there is still no ideal stent for the treatment of such lesions.4 Surgical revascularization is appropriate in multivessel
disease or when the LMCA is affected.4 The risk of the procedure is related to the non-identification of the true lumen when performing
CABG.9 Fibrinolysis is not recommended due to the risk of SCAD propagation. After the acute phase, the estimated survival is 70 to 90%.5
There is risk of recurrence in 50% of the patients, which leads us to consider the presence of a systemic susceptibility to dissections,
evidenced by the initial event.6,7,13 In short, we emphasize the need to consider the possibility of SCAD in middle-aged women, presenting
with AMI, often without identifying the triggering factor. It is believed that the conservative approach is the most appropriate and,
therefore, it was the one most widely used. As for the follow-up of these patients, although usually a long-term one, it is poorly defined.
In this registry, most complications were observed during hospitalization. The long-term behavior was relatively benign. It is therefore
essential to develop a homogenous approach for the follow-up of these patients. Spontaneous coronary artery dissection is a rare
differential diagnosis should be considered in the presence of acute coronary syndrome. This entity requires the ruling out of possible
associated systemic pathologies and a targeted therapeutic approach, being correlated with a favorable long-term prognosis. Author
contributions Conception and design of the research: Godinho AR, Vasconcelos M. Acquisition of data: Godinho AR. Analysis and interpretation
of the data: Godinho AR. Statistical analysis: Godinho AR. Writing of the manuscript: Godinho AR. Critical revision of the manuscript for
intellectual content: Vasconcelos M, Araújo V, Maciel MJ. Potential Conflict of Interest No potential conflict of interest relevant to this
article was reported. Sources of Funding There were no external funding sources for this study. Study Association This study is not
associated with any thesis or dissertation work.
