Disseminated mucormycosis endocarditis is extremely rare, and only a few cases have actually been reported in the literature. It is almost
universally fatal despite aggressive surgical and medical management. In this article, we present the case of a 48-year-old
immunocompromised male with mucormycosis endocarditis, who presented with acute bilateral lower extremity ischemia and passed away due to
subsequent multi-organ failure. To our knowledge, this is the first case report of disseminated mucormycosis native valve endocarditis
presenting as acute bilateral lower extremity ischemia. Fungal endocarditis is uncommon. However, it is considered to be the most severe
form of infective endocarditis (1). Predisposing factors include diabetes mellitus, hematologic malignancies, long-term steroid therapy,
prosthetic valves, trauma with infected wounds, and other immunocompromising conditions (1, 2). Disseminated mucormycosis endocarditis of
native valve is uncommon and associated with high mortality (2). Management invariably requires surgical intervention along with optimal
medical therapy, but the outcome is usually poor (1). A 48-year-old male with past medical history of intravenous (IV) drug abuse on
methadone treatment, untreated chronic hepatitis C infection, and poorly controlled diabetes mellitus presented to the emergency department
with 2–3 h of acute bilateral lower extremity pain which started while he was watching television. The pain was severe and continuous with
no aggravating or relieving factors. He denied any history of trauma, fever, chills, skin rashes, or joint pain. Past history was negative
for atrial fibrillation, peripheral artery disease, blood clots, or malignancies. He was a non-smoker and his last IV drug use was several
months ago. On physical examination, he was alert, oriented, afebrile, and hemodynamically stable. His vitals were BP 152/84 mm Hg, heart
rate (HR) 112/min and regular, temperature (T) 97.9 F. Both feet were pale and cold but with normal range of motion. The bilateral femoral
pulses were 2 +; however, the pedal pulses were absent. Gross motor and sensory function were intact. Pertinent labs included white blood
count of 12,900/µL, hemoglobin of 10 g/dL, platelet count of 144,000/µL, blood glucose of 345 mg/dL with normal renal function test, liver
function test, thyroid function test, and coagulation profile. Electrocardiogram showed sinus tachycardia with prolonged QTc of 556 but no
atrial fibrillation. Computed tomogram (CT) angiogram of abdomen revealed multiple splenic and bilateral renal infarctions. CT angiogram of
the pelvis showed occlusion of left common iliac, left popliteal tibial, and right common femoral and right popliteal tibial arteries (Fig.
1). The patient was taken to operating room for emergency embolectomy. He underwent embolectomies involving multiple arteries (right common
femoral and deep femoral, right popliteal and tibial, left common iliac, and left popliteal-tibial arteries) along with bilateral lower
extremity arterial tissue plasminogen activator (tPA) infusion. Intra procedure patient developed hypoxemic respiratory failure and could
not be extubated. He was transferred to the intensive care unit on ventilator support for further care. CT angiogram of abdomen/pelvis
showing a large thrombus occluding left common iliac artery. Transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE) performed to evaluate the source of multiple
emboli revealed a large 1.2 cm highly mobile vegetation attached to the anterior mitral valve leaflet with associated eccentric posteriorly
directed severe mitral regurgitation (Figs. 2 and 3). Transesophageal echocardiogram revealed additional small pulmonic valve vegetation
with a patent foramen ovale. Blood cultures were sent and the patient was started on broad spectrum antibiotics. CT of the brain
demonstrated a 10-mm area suspicious for cerebral infarct in the right frontal lobe. Bilateral carotid duplex was unremarkable. HIV 1 and 2
antibodies and Rapid Plasma Reagin (RPR) were non-reactive. Antiphospholipid and Beta-2 glycoprotein antibodies came back negative.
Emergency cardiac catheterization done due to troponin elevation showed 100% embolic occlusion of the mid left posterior descending artery.
Preliminary blood cultures were negative for any bacterial growth. Transthoracic echocardiogram showing a large highly mobile vegetation
attached on mitral valve. Transthoracic echocardiogram showing severe mitral valve regurgitation associated with the mitral valve
vegetation. The embolectomy specimen was examined histologically, showing organizing blood clot with abundant fungal organisms arranged in
parallel arrays (Fig. 4). On high power magnification, the fungal elements were characterized by wide hyphae, with lack of distinctive septa
(Fig. 5). The morphologic features were interpreted as most consistent with Mucorales. Fungal cultures were sent and empiric liposomal
amphotericin B for fungal endocarditis was added to his regimen. Cardiothoracic surgery was consulted for mitral valve replacement and
pulmonic valve repair. Unfortunately, clinical course was complicated by acute upper gastrointestinal bleeding requiring an urgent
gastroenterology evaluation delaying the surgical course. He underwent an esophagogastroduodenoscopy which revealed a 3-cm friable
pedunculated polypoid mass within the gastric antrum with diffuse gastritis/gastropathy but no active bleeding. The mass was biopsied due to
concern for malignancy. During this period, the patient continued to deteriorate with ventilator-dependent respiratory failure and multi-
organ dysfunction. Biopsy of the gastric mass was negative for malignancy, but reconsideration of valve replacement surgery was not
entertained as he was felt to be a high-risk candidate because of his comorbidities and multiple organ failure. Bacterial and fungal
cultures remained persistently negative. Embolectomy specimen showing organizing blood clot with layering. Fungal organisms are present,
arranged in parallel arrays (H&E stain, 100× original magnification). High-power view of embolectomy specimen, demonstrating abundant fungal
organisms with wide hyphae and absence of distinctive septa, arranged in a ribbon-like configuration. The morphologic features are
interpreted as consistent with Mucorales (H&E stain, 400× original magnification). With aggressive medical management, the patient was
transiently weaned off of ventilator support; however, he developed recurrent respiratory distress requiring re-intubation. Repeat TTE
showed increased mitral valve vegetation size now measuring 2.2×1.6 cm on the anterior mitral valve leaflet along with an additional
vegetation on the posterior valve leaflet. Because of the critical condition of the patient with refractory shock and multi-organ failure,
the family decided to go on comfort care. The patient continued to deteriorate and passed away on the 18th day of hospitalization.
Mucormycosis is a rare opportunistic fungal infection caused by Mucorales fungi (3). It occurs almost exclusively in persons with
immunosuppression (1, 3, 4). Although rhinocerebral mucormycosis is the commonest presentation, it may present as pulmonary, cutaneous,
gastrointestinal, or disseminated infection (3). Our patient presented with acute bilateral lower limb ischemia and also had multiple septic
emboli in spleen and kidneys, which, to the best of our knowledge, has never before been reported in the literature. Fungal endocarditis is
characterized by large vegetations with increased propensity for prosthetic heart valves and risk for embolization (1). Very rarely it can
infect the native valves (2, 4). Fungal endocarditis should always be considered in patients with large vegetations and negative routine
blood cultures (1). Our patient had large vegetations in native mitral and pulmonic valves, which by itself is rare. Bacterial and fungal
blood cultures were negative in our patient. Surgical debridement of necrotic tissue along with early administration of antifungal agent is
the mainstay of treatment (1–3, 5). Despite adequate and aggressive surgical and medical management, outcome is usually dismal (1).
Liposomal amphotericin B has been the agent of choice; however, anecdotal reports suggesting posaconazole may be effective for refractory or
intolerant cases (2, 5). All successfully treated cases reported in the literature had undergone aggressive surgical debridement along with
antifungal treatment (1). Our patient could not undergo surgical management due to multiple comorbidities and eventually died of multi-organ
failure. In acute limb ischemia in high-risk patients (intravenous drug abuse, diabetes mellitus, chronic steroid use, malignancies, and
other immunocompromising conditions), fungal endocarditis leading to embolic phenomena should be considered.Combined early surgical and
medical management is the standard treatment, but the outcome is usually poor. In acute limb ischemia in high-risk patients (intravenous
drug abuse, diabetes mellitus, chronic steroid use, malignancies, and other immunocompromising conditions), fungal endocarditis leading to
embolic phenomena should be considered. Combined early surgical and medical management is the standard treatment, but the outcome is usually
poor. Special thank you to Dr. Ranjan Pathak, MD and Dr Rittu Hingorani, MD for your support and encouragement. The authors declare that
there is no conflict of interest regarding the publication of this article.
