Supplemental Digital Content is available in the text The presence of the Philadelphia chromosome (Ph) in acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL)
has been associated with a high risk of disease relapse and a poor prognosis. Allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT) is
an established treatment for adults with Ph-positive ALL, but relapse remains the primary cause of treatment failure, and is associated with
an extremely poor prognosis. The emergence of resistance to tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) poses a challenge for patients with disease
relapses after initial treatment with TKI-containing regimens. Two patients with TKI-resistant recurrent Ph-positive ALL. Ph-positive ALL.
Anti-CD19 CAR T-cell infusion. One patient's bone marrow blasts decreased significantly, and the other reached negative minimal residual
disease (MRD). However, we first recorded the development of new-onset acute graft-versus-host disease (aGVHD) after anti-CD19 CAR T-cell
infusion in a patient who received allogeneic HSCT. Our 2 case reports also demonstrate the efficacy of anti-CD19 CAR T-cell therapy in the
treatment of TKI-resistant Ph-positive ALL. Our report suggests that anti-CD19 CAR T-cell therapy may be a promising option for the
treatment of relapsed Ph-positive ALL after conventional chemotherapy or allogeneic HSCT. However, caution is due given the possibility of
the adverse effects of cytokine release syndrome (CRS)-induced aGVHD for patients receiving allogeneic HSCT. The Philadelphia chromosome
(Ph) is the most common cytogenetic abnormality associated with adult acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL), occurring in 20% to 40% of
patients. The presence of the t(9; 22) chromosomal translocation is the single most important adverse prognostic factor in Ph-positive ALL,
with long-term survival of less than 20% with current chemotherapy regimens. Tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) directed against the ABL
kinase are now used routinely during first-line therapy for Ph-positive ALL and result in hematologic remission rates exceeding 90%.
Although outcomes have improved substantially with TKI-based regimens versus with historic controls, allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell
transplantation (HSCT) at the first remission provides the best chance of a cure for the majority of patients eligible for HSCT. However,
disease recurrence remains the main cause of failure. Treatment options are extremely limited for patients with Ph-positive ALL who
experience relapse after receiving allogeneic HSCT. In nontransplanted patients, the emergence of resistance to TKI therapy also poses a
challenge for patients with disease relapse after initial treatment with TKI-containing regimens. Chimeric antigen receptors (CARs) are
fusion proteins that incorporate an antigen- recognition moiety and a T-cell activation domain. T-cells can be modified genetically to
express anti-CD19 CARs on their surface and have been shown to exert cytotoxic effects against CD19-positive B-cells. Both autologous and
allogeneic anti-CD19 CAR T-cells have produced remission in previously treated patients with B-cell malignancies. We describe 2 patients
with Ph-positive ALL resistant to TKIs who underwent anti-CD19 CAR T-cell infusions. One patient's bone marrow blasts decreased
significantly, and the other reached negative minimal residual disease (MRD) status. Patient 1 was a 39-year-old woman who presented to a
local hospital for systemic subcutaneous ecchymosis and nasal bleeding on January 13, 2015. Blood examination revealed a white blood cell
(WBC) count of 31.96 × 109/L, hemoglobin (HGB) of 85 g/L, and a platelet (PLT) count of 10 × 109/L. Bone marrow examination and flow
cytometry suggested B-cell ALL. Cytogenetics revealed the Philadelphia chromosome and the BCR-ABL fusion gene was positive. She was thus
diagnosed with Ph-positive ALL. The patient was given induction chemotherapy with the vincristine, daunorubicin, L-asparaginase, prednisone,
and cyclophosphamide (VDCLP) protocol in combination with oral administration of imatinib mesylate capsules (0.4 g/day) on January 21, 2015.
She was then discharged after hematopoietic recovery. However, the patient stopped taking imatinib mesylate capsules on her own accord in
April 2015. On June 20, 2015, she was admitted to our hospital. At presentation, her physical examination showed multiple enlarged
superficial lymph nodes in the neck, armpits, and groin (the largest was ∼2 × 3 cm). Blood examination revealed a WBC count of
194.49 × 109/L, HGB of 78 g/L, and PLT of 18 × 109/L. Bone marrow examination revealed 91% lymphoblasts. Bone marrow fluorescent in situ
hybridization (FISH) detected a positive BCR-ABL fusion gene (positive rate = 97%). Bone marrow quantitative real-time polymerase chain
reaction (QRT-PCR) detected a positive BCR-ABL p190 transcript (BCR-ABL/ABL, 47.7%). Bone marrow Sanger sequencing found T315I and E355G
mutations in the ABL kinase region of the BCR-ABL fusion gene. The patient was given prednisone after admission; WBCs declined gradually,
and the enlarged lymph nodes regressed significantly. Subsequently, 150 mL of peripheral blood was used to prepare anti-CD19 CAR T-cells.
Lymphodepleting chemotherapy with the FC regimen (cyclophosphamide 60 mg/kg, days −8 to −7; fludarabine 25 mg/m2, days −6 to −4) was given
on July 5, 2015. On day −1, 3 days after chemotherapy, the patient exhibited persistent disease with 60% blasts present in the bone marrow.
Then, she received an infusion of anti-CD19 CAR T-cells that had been expanded with anti-CD3 and anti-CD28 antibodies and lentivirally
transduced to express the anti-CD19 CARs (Innovative Cellular Therapeutics Co., Shanghai, China). The total dose was 1.19 × 106 CAR-positive
T-cells/kg (transduction efficiency was 40%), given over a period of 3 consecutive days. No immediate infusion-related toxic effect was
noted, but she developed a febrile syndrome, with rigor and transient hypotension by days +5 to +8, cytokine levels (Fig. 1A), C-reactive
protein (CRP 161.3 mg/L), and ferritin (139,355.4 ng/mL) increased significantly, anti-infection treatment was ineffective, indicating Grade
2 cytokine release syndrome (CRS) according to the University of Pennsylvania grading system. Tocilizumab (8 mg/kg) was given on day +8
after infusion; within hours, the patient's body temperature dropped to normal. On July 28, 2015 (day +12), the patient's bone marrow blasts
had decreased significantly (Fig. 2A). Flow cytometry of bone marrow cells detected MRD of 0.06%. Positive BCR-ABL p190 transcript (0.5%)
was detected by QRT-PCR. On August 9, 2015 (day +24), the patient presented with central nervous system (CNS) symptoms of shallow left
frontal pain and left hypoplasia. Lumbar puncture revealed a cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) pressure of 250 mmH2O. We did not detect anti-CD19
CAR T-cells in the CSF because of the many prolymphocytes in the CSF smear. She was diagnosed with CNS leukemia (CNSL) (Figure 5; Data
Supplement). The patient received CNS-directed intrathecal chemotherapy followed by multicourse systemic chemotherapy. She achieved a second
morphologically complete remission, and then accepted allogeneic HSCT from a sibling donor. She is still alive and in follow-up. Serum
interleukin-6 (IL-6) levels increased after anti-CD19 CAR T-cell infusion. Anti-CD19 chimeric antigen receptor (CAR) T-cells are effective
against tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI)-resistant Philadelphia chromosome (Ph)-positive acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL). Patient 2 was a
29-year-old man who presented at a local hospital with fever and ostealgia on December 30, 2012. Blood examination revealed a WBC count of
18.04 × 109/L, HGB of 135 g/L, and PLT of 98 × 109/L. A bone marrow examination revealed the presence of t(9; 22) (q34; q11) in a
cytogenetic evaluation, and a positive BRC-ABL p190 transcript was detected by QRT-PCR. He was thus diagnosed with Ph-positive ALL. The
patient was given chemotherapy with the VDLP protocol in January 2013, and the symptoms were alleviated. He then received multiple
consolidated chemotherapies with vincristine, daunorubicin, cyclophosphamide, and prednisone (VDCP), hyper-CVAD-A, hyper-CVAD-B, VDP, and
hyper-CVAD-B regimens, followed by haploidentical allogeneic HSCT on September 12, 2013. During the HSCT, he received infusions of bone
marrow and peripheral blood stem cells (mononuclear cells 7.08 × 108/kg, CD34+ cells 3.02 × 106/kg). In addition, 31 mL of umbilical cord
blood (total nucleated cells 1 × 107/kg) was infused on September 25, 2013. During the HSCT, the patient had a history of intestinal acute
graft-versus-host disease (aGVHD), but this resolved with anti-rejection treatments. However, flow cytometry of bone marrow cells detected
positive MRD 6 months after transplantation. The patient was given targeted therapy with imatinib mesylate, but 2 weeks later, the MRD was
found to have progressed. He then received chemotherapy with the VDCP protocol, but he was still MRD-positive. Due to imatinib resistance,
therapy with dasatinib was started and MRD-negative status was achieved. However, the patient stopped dasatinib therapy for 1 month due to
the adverse reaction of pleural effusion. Positive BCR-ABL p190 transcript was detected (0.29%) in bone marrow cells by QRT-PCR on April 7,
2015. Positive BCR-ABL p190 transcript was still detected (1.95%) by QRT-PCR on June 10, 2015. The patient chose to continue dasatinib
therapy. Positive MRD was still detected by flow cytometry (0.78%) and QRT-PCR (4.74%) in bone marrow cells on June 23, 2015. Chemotherapy
was given to prevent recurrence on June 25, 2015, but the patient did not finish the chemotherapy due to infection. Then, cryopreserved
donor peripheral blood stem cells (1 × 107/kg) were infused on June 30, 2015. The patient was admitted to our hospital on August 17, 2015.
Blood examination revealed a WBC count of 3.6 × 109/L, HGB of 88 g/L, and PLT of 77 × 109/L. Flow cytometry of bone marrow cells revealed
26% abnormal immature cells, with a B-cell phenotype accompanied by myeloperoxidase (MPO) expression. STR examination of bone marrow cells
revealed incomplete donor chimerism (87% of donor origin). Peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs, 100 mL) were collected to prepare
anti-CD19 CAR T-cells on August 25, 2015. Lymphodepleting chemotherapy with the FC regimen (cyclophosphamide 60 mg/kg, day −8; fludarabine
25 mg/m2, days −4 to −3) was given on August 29, 2015. However, he developed a high fever and hypotension during the chemotherapy; we then
reduced the chemotherapy dose. After anti-infection and rehydration treatment, the patient's body temperature returned to normal, and the
hypotension resolved. On day −1, 2 days after chemotherapy, the patient exhibited persistent disease with 24% blasts present in bone marrow.
Then, anti-CD19 CAR T-cells were infused at a total dose of 1.0 × 106 CAR-positive T-cells/kg (transduction efficiency was 30%) in a single
dose. No immediate infusion-related toxic effect was noted, but he developed a fever and hypotension on day +1. Anti-infection treatment was
ineffective, with increased cytokine levels (Fig. 1B), CRP (107.5 mg/L), and ferritin (15,570.1 ng/mL), indicating grade 4 CRS. Tocilizumab
(8 mg/kg) was given on day +6 after the infusion; the patient's body temperature dropped to normal quickly. On day +8, a bone marrow
myelogram revealed immature lymphocytes accounting for 1.5%, and abnormal lymphocytes accounting for 14.5% (considering CAR T-cells). Both
flow cytometry and QRT-PCR of bone marrow cells indicated MRD-negative status (Fig. 2B). During this time period, anti-CD19 CAR T-cells
revealed rapid expansion in the peripheral blood (Fig. 3). However, the patient developed abdominal pain and diarrhea on September 15, 2015
(day +9), and the symptoms became aggravated gradually, with diarrhea reaching more than 20 times per day. Cytomegalovirus DNA in blood and
multiple stool bacterial cultures were negative. Anti-diarrheal and anti-infection treatments were ineffective. STR of bone marrow cells
revealed full donor chimerism on September 28, 2015. An electronic colonoscopy revealed mucosal congestion and edema of the whole large
intestine (Fig. 4A). A pathological examination suggested mucosal chronic inflammation, surface erosion, and granulation tissue hyperplasia.
There was more inflammatory cell infiltration in the mesenchyme (Fig. 4B). A diagnosis of intestinal aGVHD was made in accordance with these
clinical and histopathological manifestations. The patient was given anti-rejection treatment, with methylprednisolone, methotrexate, and
cyclosporine for 3 weeks. His symptoms improved gradually; he was kept on maintenance treatment with cyclosporine for 1 month. On October 8,
2015 (day +32), the patient was MRD-negative in terms of bone marrow cells by flow cytometry and QRT-PCR (Figure 6; Data Supplement). At the
last follow-up (6 months after infusion), he was in complete molecular remission and still alive. Expansion of anti-CD19 CAR T-cells in
peripheral blood. Electronic colonoscopy revealed mucosal congestion and edema throughout the large intestine. The pathological examination
suggested chronic mucosal inflammation. We report here 2 cases of adult patients with recurrent Ph-positive ALL who underwent anti-CD19 CAR
T-cell therapy. Sanger sequencing showed the T315I mutation in the ABL kinase region of the BCR-ABL fusion gene in 1 case. The patient was
resistant to first- and second-generation TKIs, and routine chemotherapy was unsatisfactory. After infusion of CAR T-cells, the patient's
bone marrow blasts decreased significantly, but this was not complete remission, probably due to the modest doses of cells administered in
our treatment plan. This is the first time we demonstrated the efficacy of anti-CD19 CAR T-cell therapy in the treatment of TKI-resistant
Ph-positive ALL. Although the patient did not receive a second infusion, due to the CNSL, complete molecular remission or MRD-negative
status can reasonably be expected with a second or multiple infusions of anti-CD19 CAR T-cells. The other case showed recurrence after
allogeneic HSCT. The disease was still aggravated during treatment with a second-generation TKI, which could also be considered TKI
resistance. CRS developed after infusion of anti-CD19 CAR T-cells, which induced aGVHD. The symptoms were alleviated after tocilizumab and
anti-rejection treatments. This is the first reported CRS-induced aGVHD after the treatment with CAR T-cells in an adult Ph-positive ALL
patient with recurrence after allogeneic HSCT. It has been reported that allogeneic anti-CD19 CAR T-cells can effectively treat B-cell
malignancies that progress after allogeneic HSCT without developing new-onset aGVHD. In patient 2, STR of bone marrow cells revealed that
most of the cells originated from the donor, and aGVHD is unlikely to occur after infusion of chimeric anti-CD19 CAR T-cells. One factor
that may explain this lack of aGVHD is the limited persistence of anti-CD19 CAR T-cells, because aGVHD takes a median of 4 weeks to develop
after standard donor lymphocyte infusion (DLI), whereas the highest levels of anti-CD19 CAR T-cells were noted before 4 weeks postinfusion
and declined thereafter. Another possible explanation is the modest dose administered to our patients, which was not sufficient to induce
aGVHD, versus standard DLI. However, aGVHD was indeed observed in combination with CRS in 1 of our patients. The most likely explanation
seems to be CRS-induced aGVHD. The pathophysiology of aGVHD has been considered to involve a 3-step process: first, host tissue damage due
to the conditioning regimen, infections, and possibly the underlying disease, which induces the secretion of inflammatory cytokines; second,
donor T-cell activation and proliferation under the stimulation of increased cell surface expression of leukocyte adhesion molecules and
human leukocyte antigen (HLA) molecules, followed by a strong cytokine response (such as the secretion of IL-2 and IFN-γ); and third, these
cytokines further promote antigen presentation and the recruitment of effector T-cells and innate immune cells, which further augment the
inflammatory cytokine response (such as TNF). The effector T-cells, natural killer (NK) cells, macrophages, and inflammatory cytokines
result in end-organ damage. Acute GVHD can occur in the absence of primary tissue injury in settings such as transfusion-related GVHD,
especially in the case of a greater HLA disparity between donor and host. This indicates that the conditioning phase is not absolutely
necessary for the induction of aGVHD. However, the network of soluble cytokines form a key link between each of the 3 steps and is
responsible for the bulk of target organ damage. Thus, we suspect that aGVHD was induced by CRS on the basis of direct tissue damage due to
lymphodepleting chemotherapy and a greater HLA disparity between the donor and host. There was still no protocol for subsequent treatment
after anti-CD19 CAR T-cell therapy for B-ALL; 2 or more infusions, allogeneic HSCT, or follow-up could be considered. Decisions should be
made according to a comprehensive judgment with persistence of CAR T-cells, MRD, and STR. For patients with recurrence after allogeneic
HSCT, induction of graft-versus-leukemia (GVL) immune surveillance could be considered to prevent recurrence. For patients with Ph-positive
ALL, maintenance treatment with TKIs, if not resistant, could be considered after negative MRD status is reached. Our case reports
demonstrate the efficacy of anti-CD19 CAR T-cell therapy in the treatment of TKI-resistant adult Ph-positive ALL. They also suggest that
anti-CD19 CAR T-cell therapy may be a promising option for the treatment of relapsed Ph-positive ALL after conventional chemotherapy or
allogeneic HSCT. However, caution should be paid to the possibility of the adverse effect of CRS-induced aGVHD for patients receiving
allogeneic HSCT. The optimal dose of CAR T-cells and the follow-up treatment remain to be clarified. This is a report of 2 cases; further
well-designed and randomized studies with larger numbers of cases are needed to fully evaluate this strategy. We designed a CAR lentivirus
vector that consisted of an FMC63-derived CD19-specific single-chain variable fragment (scFv), a 4–1 BB costimulatory domain, and a CD3ζ
signaling domain. The lentivirus was produced by transfecting 293T cells with CAR lentiviral vectors and viral packaging plasmids.
Peripheral blood was collected from the patient, and CD3 T cells were isolated and activated as described in. CD3 T cells were cultured in
X-VIVO 15 medium (Lonza Group Ltd., Switzerland) containing 100 U/mL interleukin-2 (IL-2), and transduced with CAR lentivirus supernatant
within 24 to 48 hours. Transduced anti-CD19 CAR T-cells were maintained at about 0.5 to 1 × 106/mL before infusion. Transduction efficiency
was evaluated at 5 to 7 days after CAR lentivirus transduction, and quality controls for fungi, bacteria, mycoplasma, chlamydia, and
endotoxin were performed by a third-party medical laboratory (KingMed Diagnostics, China). On the day of infusion, fresh anti-CD19 CAR
T-cells were delivered to the hospital by hand in the shortest time. The CD3/CD28 beads were removed and the cells for fresh infusion were
washed and concentrated in 20 mL infusion media that contained Plasma-Lyte A (Baxter Healthcare Corporation, USA) along with 5% human serum
albumin (CSL Behring, USA). A quality control assessment of the infusion cells was also performed. Flow cytometry was used to characterize
surface expression of anti-CD19 CAR T-cells with antibodies of the anti-hCD3 FITC, anti-hCD19 APC, anti-hCD45 PE, and PE streptavidin (BD
Bioscience, USA). The transduction efficiency was determined by FACS using goat-anti-mouse F(ab’)2 antibody (Jackson Immuno Research, USA).
Serial peripheral blood samples after the anti-CD19 CAR T-cells infusion were collected in K2EDTA BD Vacutainer tubes (BD Bioscience).
Persistence of anti-CD19 CAR T-cells in patients was determined by FACS using goat-anti-mouse F(ab’)2 antibody (Jackson Immuno Research).
Circulating CAR T-cell numbers per μL were calculated on the basis of measured absolute CD3+ T lymphocyte counts. Genomic DNA was extracted
using a QIAamp DNA Blood Mini Kit (Qiagen, Germany). Quantitative real-time PCR was performed in triplicate using the ABI 2 × Taqman
Universal Master Mix with the AmpErase UNG (Applied Biosystems, USA), in a 7500 real-time PCR system (Applied Biosystems). Copy numbers per
microgram of genomic DNA were calculated from a standard curve of 10-fold serial dilutions of purified CAR plasmid containing 102 to
108 copies/μL. Amplification of an internal control gene was used for normalization of DNA quantities. Primers/probes specific for the anti-
CD19 CAR transgene and an internal control gene were as described before. The levels of IL-2, IL-4, IL-6, IL-10, tumor necrosis factor
(TNF), and interferon-gamma (IFN-γ) in the peripheral blood were detected using flow cytometry and the Cytometric Beads Array Flex Set (BD
Bioscience). We thank Guiming Wang from the Department of Pathology for providing pathological pictures. Abbreviations: aGVHD = acute graft-
versus-host disease, ALL = acute lymphoblastic leukemia, CARs = chimeric antigen receptors, CIK = cytokine-induced killer cells, CNS =
central nervous system, CNSL = CNS leukemia, CRS = cytokine release syndrome, CSF = cerebrospinal fluid, DLI = donor lymphocyte infusion,
FISH = fluorescent in situ hybridization, GVL = graft-versus-leukemia, HGB = hemoglobin, HLA = human leukocyte antigen, HSCT = hematopoietic
stem cell transplantation, IFN-γ = interferon-γ, IL-6 = interleukin-6 (IL-6), MPO = myeloperoxidase, MRD = minimal residual disease, NK =
natural killer, Ph = Philadelphia chromosome, PLT = platelet, QRT-PCR = quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction, scFv = single
chain variable fragment, STR = short tandem repeat, TKIs = tyrosine kinase inhibitors, TNF = tumor necrosis factor, WBC = white blood cells.
Y-mZ and ZW contributed equally to this work and should be considered cofirst authors. LX and QZ contributed equally to this work.
Funding/support: This work was supported by a grant from the Guangzhou Healthcare and Cooperative Innovation major projects, Grant number:
201400000003-1. The study protocol was approved by the Institutional Review Board of Guangdong No. 2 Provincial People's Hospital (permit
number: 2015-KYLL-039) and complied with country-specific regulatory requirements. Written informed consent was obtained from the 2 patients
before the initiation of treatment. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this case report and any
accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. Authorship: QZ and LX
provided the overall strategy and carried out critical interpretations. YMZ reviewed the literature and wrote the paper. Manufacturing of
anti-CD19 CAR T-cells, flow cytometry, and quantitative PCR of clinical samples were performed by CFP, JJ, JPW, and SL, under the direction
of ZW. YPT, YYD, ZL, and RMO treated the patients and collected the data. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. LX and ZW are
cofounders of Innovative Cellular Therapeutics Co., Ltd. (Formerly SiDanSai Biotechnology Co., Ltd), a biotechnology company focused on the
research and development of cell therapy and stem cell technology. CP, JJ, and JW are current employees of Innovative Cellular Therapeutics
Co., Ltd. The other authors declare that they have no competing interests. Supplemental Digital Content is available for this article.
Supplemental digital content is available for this article. Direct URL citations appear in the printed text and are provided in the HTML and
PDF versions of this article on the journal's Website (www.md-journal.com).
