Ventricular double rupture (VDR) is a rare but lethal mechanical complication of acute myocardial infarction (AMI). The early identification
and timely treatment of VDR remain challenging problems. We present a case of AMI with VDR and briefly review the characteristics and
prognosis of this life-threatening disease. A 77-year-old male presented to our hospital with a 4-day history of severe dizziness, mild
chest tightness, and dyspnea. An inferior AMI was diagnosed. On the second hospital day, hypotension and a new cardiac murmur was found. The
emergency echocardiographic study disclosed a ventricular septal defect. Soon after that the patient suddenly died of ventricular free-wall
rupture. In patients with AMI complicated by a septal perforation in the apical region, close to the septum-free wall junction, special
attention should be paid to the great risk of VDR. Other high risk factors included advanced age, delayed reperfusion, and inferior
infarction. Sufficient evaluation of the risk factors, close monitoring of vital signs, early identification of the specific symptoms, and
timely treatment are the key points for the effective prediction and prevention of VDR. Ventricular rupture (VR), a rare but fatal
mechanical complication of acute myocardial infarction (AMI), is the second leading cause of in-hospital death and is responsible for as
many as 15% of total early deaths in patients with AMI. The types of VR include left ventricular free wall rupture (FWR), ventricular septal
rupture (VSR), and papillary muscle rupture. In addition, ventricular double rupture (VDR) is defined as the coexistence of 2 of the above-
mentioned rupture types. We present the case of a male patient who suffered sudden death due to the coexistence of VSR and FWR complicating
inferior AMI. The point of this case is to highlight that VSR in the apical region, which is close to the septum–free wall junction, is a
precursor of VDR, and that an inferior infarction is an important poor prognostic factor for VDR. A 77-year-old male with diabetes,
hypertension, ischemic stroke, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, and chronic kidney disease presented to our hospital with a 4-day
history of severe dizziness, mild chest tightness, and dyspnea. Clinical examination showed an obesity body habitus and a respiratory rate
of 22 breaths/min. His heart rate was 82 beats/min, and his blood pressure was 135/68 mm Hg. Chest expansion and breath sounds were mildly
reduced bilaterally, with some wet rales in the lower region. Auscultation revealed a normal heart sound with no murmur. A smooth liver edge
was palpable below the right costal margin and there was mild bilateral leg edema in the ankles. The electrocardiogram (ECG) revealed convex
upwards ST-segment elevation with T-wave inversions and pathological Q waves in leads II, III, and aVF, and second-degree atrioventricular
block (Fig. 1). Additionally, cardiac troponin T and pro–brain natriuretic peptide levels were clearly increased. An inferior AMI was
diagnosed. Because of the delayed admission (4 days after symptom onset) and the stable clinical conditions, the patient was treated
conservatively. On the second hospital day, hypotension occurred in the morning and cardiac auscultation indicated the onset of a new
pansystolic murmur at the inner proximal apex. An emergency bedside echocardiographic study disclosed a ventricular septal defect with the
site of septal perforation at the apex, adjacent to the septum–free wall junction (Fig. 2A and B). Emergency surgery was considered, but the
patient suddenly lost consciousness and palpable pulse approximately 50 minutes later. Cardiopulmonary resuscitation was performed
immediately, and electromechanical dissociation was observed on the ECG monitor. Bedside echocardiography displayed a massive hemorrhagic
pericardial effusion (Fig. 3) and the near disappearance of cardiac systolic movement. Pericardiocentesis was performed, but there was no
recovery of spontaneous circulation. The patient died of VDR. Electrocardiogram showing acute myocardial infarction, with ST-segment
elevation in the inferior leads, and second-degree atrioventricular block. (A) Nonstandard left ventricular short-axis section at the apical
level showing a ventricular septal defect (arrow). The site of septal perforation was the apex, adjacent to the septum–free wall junction.
(B) Color Doppler shows a left-to-right shunt at the level of the ventricular septal perforation. Echocardiography showing a massive
hemorrhagic pericardial effusion (arrow). Owing to the increasing use of reperfusion therapy, the rational administration of medicines, and
the improvements in surgical techniques, VR tends to occur with decreasing frequency. However, as its mortality is reported to remain almost
unchanged in the past few decades, VR is still recognized as a devastating complication of AMI. VDR, with most frequent combination with FWR
and VSR, is observed in approximately 3% of patients with FWR, 16% of those with VSR, and 0.3% of all patients with AMI. FWR, the most
common type of VR with an estimated incidence being approximately 2% to 10%, causes 3% to 20% of overall mortality and 15% of the in-
hospital mortality after AMI. The incidence of VSR decreased from 1% to 3% in the prethrombolytic era to 0.17% to 0.31% in the era of
reperfusion therapy. Previous research studies of autopsied hearts demonstrated that VSR was accompanied by FWR in 17% of cases. The
outcomes of VSR are extremely poor in both medically managed patients and those treated with surgery. Patients with VSR have significantly
higher mortality at 30 days and 1 year, and are more likely to suffer from shock and congestive heart failure. Several risk factors for VR
in post-AMI patients were found in previous studies, including advanced age, female sex, prior stroke, a history of hypertension and chronic
kidney disease, increased heart rate, worse Killip class at admission, persistent ST-segment elevation, anterior or transmural infarction,
total occlusion of the infarct-related artery, continued physical activity postinfarction, and delayed treatment. The role of thrombolytic
agents and β-blockers in the development of VR is controversial. Patients with VR are less likely to have a history of diabetes, prior
myocardial infarction, or heart failure. The mean time interval between AMI and FWR appears to be 3.7 ± 4.4 days, while that between AMI and
VSR is 4.1 ± 3.6 days. In fact, in half of all cases, VR may occur as early as a few hours after infarction. Thrombolytic therapy may
shorten the time interval and accelerate the onset of VR via myocardial hemorrhage. Moreover, advanced age, inferior AMI, cardiogenic shock,
cardiac arrest, right ventricular dysfunction, and a long interval between onset and surgery are considered to be poor prognostic factors
after VR has developed. The patient in the present report unfortunately had numerous risk factors for post-AMI VR: advanced age, complex
clinical conditions, delayed admission, no ST-segment resolution, and no timely reperfusion or surgery. Most notable among these risk
factors may have been the site of septal perforation, which lay in the apical region, close to the septum–free wall junction. Tanaka et al
found that the perforation site of VSR played an important role in the development of FWR in 4 patients; the authors advised that septal
perforation at the junction between the ventricular septum and the free wall is a precursor of VDR that mandates surgical treatment as early
as possible. In addition, our case presented sudden death due to VDR as a complication of inferior ST-segment elevation AMI. VSR occurs in
the setting of inferior infarction in approximately 30% of all cases. Since an inferior infarction is more likely to be associated with
right ventricular dysfunction and complex VSR, patients with an inferior infarction tend to have worse outcomes. For patients with AMI
complicated by a septal perforation in the apical region, close to the septum–free wall junction, special attention should be paid to the
great risk of VDR. The outcomes of VDR remain extremely poor, even in patients who undergo surgical repair. Sufficient evaluation of the
risk factors, close monitoring of vital signs, early identification of the specific symptoms, and timely treatment are the key points for
the effective prediction and prevention of VDR. Abbreviations: AMI = acute myocardial infarction, ECG = electrocardiogram, FWR = free wall
rupture, VDR = ventricular double rupture, VR = ventricular rupture, VSR = ventricular septal rupture. S-JC and CZ contributed equally to
this work. The authors have no conflicts of interest to disclose.
