Although cervical foreign bodies have been previously reported, the report of a needle in the cervical spinal cord is rare. Herein, we
report a rare case of a sewing needle in contact with the cervical dura mater and vertebral artery. A 47-year-old man presented with
discomfort in the posterior region of his neck. Approximately 2 years before admission, he suffered a stiff neck and had stabbed the
posterior region of his neck with a sewing needle. The sewing needle had deeply entered his neck, and he left it alone because it could not
be identified or removed. On examination, the patient had a full range of neck motion, but was experiencing discomfort. Cervical spine
radiographs revealed a metal foreign body oriented from between the C2 and C3 spinous processes to the anterior cervical spine. Computed
tomography (CT) myelogram and CT angiogram revealed that the sewing needle was penetrating into the foramen transversarium and was in
contact with the cervical dura mater and the right vertebral artery. The sewing needle was removed under general anesthesia. Cerebrospinal
fluid leakage occurred immediately after removal of the needle. Symptoms of discomfort disappeared without any complications. This is the
first report of a sewing needle that entered the cervical spinal canal while avoiding the cervical spine and the vertebral artery. Although
no symptoms occurred for nearly 2 years, surgical removal of a foreign body near the cervical spinal cord and vertebral artery should be
performed as soon as possible, before the occurrence of symptoms. Penetrating injury is a commonly observed condition in daily medical
practice. Needles have been identified as foreign bodies in the distal regions of the extremities as well as in the heart, lung, and liver.
Cervical foreign bodies have been previously reported, but the report of a foreign body in the cervical spine is rare. Herein, we report an
unusual case involving a sewing needle that had been stabbed into the neck by the patient. In our case, the patient signed related informed
consent for the publication of clinical data and images. A 47-year-old man presented with discomfort in the posterior region of his neck.
His medical history included schizophrenia and hypospadias. Approximately 2 years before admission, he experienced a stiff neck and stabbed
the posterior region of his neck with a sewing needle. He reported that the sewing needle entered his neck deeply, and he left it alone
because it could not be identified or removed. Thereafter, he did not experience any symptoms until the recent discomfort. Examination of
the puncture site did not reveal an obvious entry point. He had a full range of neck motion, but experienced neck discomfort. Neurological
examination did not reveal any abnormalities. Posteroanterior and lateral cervical spine radiographs revealed a metal foreign body
(presumably the sewing needle), measuring about 5 cm, running from between the C2 and C3 spinous processes to the anterior cervical spine
(Fig. 1). A cervical spine computed tomography (CT) myelogram and CT angiogram revealed that the sewing needle had penetrated into the
foramen transversarium and was in contact with wall of the cervical dura mater and was passing near the right vertebral artery (Figs. 2–4).
Magnetic resonance imaging was not performed due to the contraindicated nature of the foreign body. We decided to operate on this patient to
remove the needle, because if this condition persisted, it could lead to potential damage to the spinal cord and vertebral artery.
Posteroanterior (A) and lateral (B) cervical spine radiographs revealing the embedded sewing needle. Three-dimensional computed tomography
myelograms demonstrating the orientation of the sewing needle from between the C2 and C3 spinous processes to the anterior cervical spine.
Axial computed tomography myelograms showing that the sewing needle penetrated the foramen transversarium and was in contact with the
cervical dura mater. Arrows indicate the sewing needle in each image panel. Computed tomography angiogram demonstrating that the sewing
needle was in contact with the right vertebral artery. Removal of the foreign body was performed under general anesthesia. A 3-cm incision
was made at the midline of the neck, and the tip of the needle was identified and easily extracted after the exposure of the C2 and C3
spinous processes; however, cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) leakage occurred immediately after removal. CSF leakage repair was performed by
suturing the ligamentum nuchae tightly. The CSF leak indicated that the needle was in contact with the dura mater. The removed sewing needle
was completely covered with rust (Fig. 5). The microbiological study of the needle was not performed. The patient's postoperative course was
uneventful; following 3 days of antibiotic therapy with high penetration of ceftriaxone in the CSF. The treatment of tetanus was not
administered because the foreign body had migrated into his neck long ago. The patient was discharged on postoperative day 5 with no
symptoms. The removed sewing needle was completely covered with rust. Cervical foreign bodies have been previously reported, including cases
of a nail-gun nail, chopstick, sublaminar wiring, and a pocket knife blade. However, the report of a needle in the cervical spine is rare;
only 2 previous reports exist. In 1 case, the needle accidentally penetrated the cervical spine during a soccer game. In the other case, the
patient had been performing acupuncture on herself in the posterior neck region. In the current and both previous cases, the needle was
removed under general anesthesia without any problems and the symptoms resolved. In the present case, the needle entered the neck while
avoiding the cervical spine and the vertebral artery, despite penetration through the spinal cord and into the foramen transversarium, as
demonstrated by CT myelogram and CT angiogram. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first such report. Diagnostic imaging techniques
such as 3D CT, CT myelogram, and CT angiogram are necessary because these tools can identify the relationship between a foreign body and
tissues, such as blood vessels and nerves. In this case, CT myelogram and CT angiogram did not show penetration into the spinal cord and
vertebral artery; hence, minimum invasive surgery was chosen. There are more reports in the literature involving an acupuncture needle,
rather than a sewing needle, as a foreign body in the cervical spine. In general, sewing needles are thicker than acupuncture needles and
are made of iron. Therefore, if left alone, a sewing needle may erode, which could lead to breakage and infection. We were concerned about a
risk of meningitis; however, the patient exhibited no such symptoms. Ulloth et al reported a case of a CSF fistula caused by an acupuncture
needle. In the present case, CSF leakage was observed immediately after removal of the needle. The cause of the CSF leakage was identified
as a dural tear due to the needle removal. Thus, the contact between the needle and dura mater may result in a dural tear, even if the
needle does not pierce the spinal cord. In our case, the patient did not experience any symptoms after stabbing the posterior region of this
neck with the sewing needle. However, the clinical picture of contact between the dura mater and a foreign body may involve sensorimotor
deficits, CSF leakage, meningitis, and vertebral artery injury. Therefore, the surgical removal of a foreign body near the cervical spinal
cord and vertebral artery should be performed as soon as possible, before the appearance of symptoms and signs. We provide the first report
of a sewing needle that entered the cervical spinal canal while avoiding the cervical spine and vertebral artery. Although no symptoms
occurred for nearly 2 years, the needle had penetrated the foramen transversarium. Surgical removal of a foreign body near the cervical
spinal cord and vertebral artery should be performed before the occurrence of symptoms. Abbreviations: CSF = cerebrospinal fluid, CT =
computed tomography. The authors have no conflicts of interest to disclose.
