Sarcoidosis is an idiopathic systemic inflammatory granulomatous disorder comprised of epithelioid and multinucleated giant cells with
little necrosis which involve various organs. Laryngeal involvement is extremely rare, with a prevalence of about 0.5 to 1%. Here we present
a case of laryngeal involvement of sarcoidosis demonstrated on 18F-Fluorodesoxyglucose Positron-Emission Tomography/Computed Tomography (FDG
PET/CT). A 63 year-old man suffering from dysphonia was referred to our department for characterization of laryngeal lesion suspicious for
cancer with non-informative biopsy, the sample was not sufficient for diagnosis. FDG PET/CT showed a pathological uptake on the right vocal
cord, but also highlighted a bilateral uptake in intrathoracic hilar lymphadenopathy areas, typically found in several inflammatory
diseases. New laryngeal targeted biopsies revealed non-caseating epithelioid granulomas suggesting sarcoidosis involvement. After 6 months
of systemic steroid treatment, FDG PET/CT showed a significant decrease of the laryngeal uptake. This case shows the usefulness of FDG
PET/CT to accurately assess inflammatory activity in rare extra-pulmonary sarcoidosis involvement. Moreover, this case emphasizes that FDG
PET/CT is an interesting tool for assessing therapeutic efficacy of inflammatory diseases such as sarcoidosis. Sarcoidosis is an idiopathic
systemic inflammatory granulomatous disorder comprised of epithelioid and multinucleated giant cells with little necrosis. The exact cause
of sarcoidosis is still unknown. It commonly affects young and middle-aged adults and frequently presents with bilateral hilar
lymphadenopathy and pulmonary infiltration. However, sarcoidosis can involve any organ in the body. Laryngeal involvement is extremely rare,
with a prevalence of about 0.5% to 1%. Here, we present a case of laryngeal involvement of sarcoidosis demonstrated on
18F-fluorodeoxyglucose positron-emission tomography/computed tomography (FDG PET/CT). In October 2014, a 63-year-old man suffering from
dysphonia was referred to our nuclear medicine department for characterization of laryngeal lesion suspicious for cancer shown by
laryngoscopy, with noninformative biopsy, the sample was not sufficient for diagnosis. FDG PET/CT maximum intensity projection showed a
pathological uptake in the right upper aerodigestive tract evocative of cancer, without cervical nodal abnormality. FDG PET/CT axial slices
showed an abnormal uptake in a right vocal cord thickening, with an unusual high metabolic activity (maximum standardized uptake value,
SUVmax = 9) suggested the possibility of a primary laryngeal tumor, less likely an infectious or inflammatory disease. Moreover, FDG PET/CT
axial slices also showed a bilateral and symmetric abnormal uptake in intrathoracic hilar lymphadenopathy (SUVmax = 6.1) typically found in
inflammatory diseases such as sarcoidosis (Fig. 1). FDG PET/CT maximum intensity projection and FDG PET/CT axial slices images at diagnosis.
Images showed a pathological FDG uptake in the right upper aerodigestive tract (a, blue arrow), with a right vocal cord thickening (b, c,
white arrows), without cervical nodal abnormality. Moreover, images demonstrated a bilateral and symmetric abnormal uptake in intrathoracic
hilar lymphadenopathy (SUVmax = 6.1) (d, e, red arrows). FDG PET/CT = 18F-fluorodesoxyglucose positron-emission tomography/computed
tomography, SUVmax = maximum standardized uptake value. Multiple laryngeal biopsy samples revealed noncaseating epithelioid granulomas,
characteristic finding of sarcoidosis involvement (Fig. 2). Differential diagnoses such as infectious diseases (negative culture for
mycobacterium and fungi) or tumor-related sarcoïd reaction were excluded. Histopathology of laryngeal biopsy sample. Histopathology revealed
noncaseating epithelioid granulomas, characteristic finding of sarcoidosis involvement. Patient was treated with systemic steroid treatment.
After 6 months of treatment, the patient underwent FDG PET/CT for therapeutic response assessment in April 2015. FDG PET/CT showed a
significant decrease of the abnormal uptake in the right vocal cord (SUVmax = 4.5) and confirmed the benign etiology of the lesion;
moreover, FDG PET/CT showed a stable uptake in intrathoracic hilar lymphadenopathy (SUVmax = 6.5) (Fig. 3). Patient informed consent was
given. FDG PET/CT images after 6 months of treatment. FDG PET/CT images showed a significant decrease (SUVmax = 4.5) of the abnormal uptake
in the right vocal cord (a,b, blue arrow). Stable uptake in intrathoracic hilar lymphadenopathy (SUVmax = 6.5) (b, red arrow). FDG
PET/CT = 18F-fluorodesoxyglucose positron-emission tomography/computed tomography, SUVmax = maximum standardized uptake value. Sarcoidosis
is an idiopathic systemic inflammatory granulomatous disorder comprised of epithelioid and multinucleated giant cells with little necrosis.
It commonly affects young and middle-aged adults and frequently presents with bilateral hilar lymphadenopathy and pulmonary infiltration.
The eyes, skin, liver, spleen, lymph nodes, salivary glands, heart, nervous system, muscles, bones, and other organs may also be involved.
Laryngeal involvement is extremely rare, with a prevalence of about 0.5% to 1%. The three criteria for its diagnosis are: clinical and
radiological presentation, evidence of noncaseating granulomas, and evidence of no alternative diseases. Granulomas of known causes such as
infectious diseases (mycobacterial, fungal, or parasitic infections), chronic inflammatory diseases such as pneumoconiosis, Wegener's
granulomatosis, or tumor-related sarcoïd reaction, must be excluded. Extrapulmonary localizations should be detected with a thorough
physical examination, with a systematic ophthalmological examination, and with an electrocardiogram and blood tests. Confidence in diagnosis
can be strengthened with time. FDG PET/CT is routinely used for the diagnosis, staging, and therapeutic assessment of several malignancies.
Due to the correlation between accumulation of FDG and glucose transporter type 1 cell membrane of activated granulocytes overexpression, it
becomes nowadays a relevant tool for the management of several infectious and inflammatory diseases, such as sarcoidosis. Previous studies
have shown that FDG PET/CT can be used to accurately assess inflammatory activity in patients with persistent symptoms without biological
inflammatory activity, especially in uncommon localizations or when a biopsy is not possible. FDG PET/CT could be the most reliable method
for the detection of granulomatous myocardial lesions with appropriate diet without carbohydrates which inhibit physiological myocardial
uptake. This case confirms the usefulness of FDG PET/CT in sarcoidosis disease especially for the diagnosis of potentially rare extra-
pulmonary involvement. Moreover, this case emphasizes that FDG PET/CT is an interesting tool for assessing therapeutic efficacy of
inflammatory diseases. Abbreviations: FDG PET/CT = 18F-fluorodesoxyglucose positron-emission tomography/computed tomography, SUVmax =
maximum standardized uptake value. The authors have no funding and conflicts of interest to disclose.
