Cor triatriatum dexter (CTD) is a rare congenital cardiac malformation with various manifestations and has been sporadically described in
dogs. Clinically the dogs present with nonspecific signs of right heart failure or Budd-Chiari-like syndrome. Other associated concurrent
cardiovascular anomalies are commonly reported. Diagnosis and full characterization of this complex malformation requires careful
investigation and often a multimodal imaging approach. A 10-week-old, male intact, Golden Retriever was presented with clinical signs of
stunted growth, anorexia, and progressive ascites. CTD imperforate with sole separation of the caudal vena cava (CdVC) and concurrent venous
wall mineralization was conjointly diagnosed and fully characterized by echocardiography, non-selective angiography, computed tomography
angiography and cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). This was successfully treated surgically and the dog returned to normal activity.
To the author’s knowledge, this is the first case of CTD imperforate separating the CdVC from the right atrium (RA) with presumed secondary
CdCV wall and hepatic parenchyma mineralization reported in a dog. CTD is an important and potentially correctable cause for the development
of ascites in a young puppy. Accurate diagnosis of this complex cardiac anomaly is important for selection of the most appropriate curative
treatment option. Cor triatriatum dexter (CTD) has been infrequently reported in dogs and the overall prevalence is low . With this cardiac
anomaly, the embryonic right valve of the sinus venosus fails to regress, resulting in partitioning of the right atrium (RA) into two
distinct chambers and effectively creating a triatrial heart . The fibrous membrane dividing the RA is most commonly perforated, however, in
some cases, like the one described, it can be imperforate leading to complete obstruction of the venous return to the heart from the caudal
half of the body through the caudal vena cava (CdVC) and/or from the coronary sinus depending on its location. Given the varying extent of
regression failure seen in different cases, the venous return from the abdomen to the RA can be impeded to varying degrees. This may result
in clinical signs suggestive of caudal right-sided congestive heart failure (CHF) or a Budd-Chiari-like syndrome . Consequently, alternate
venous pathways, including cavo-azygos shunting, are often observed in order to ensure venous return from the caudal extremities and abdomen
back to the right atrium is possible. Since CTD can present with a variety of concurrent cardiac anomalies including tricuspid valve
dysplasia, dynamic subaortic stenosis, atrial septal defect (ASD), pulmonic valvular stenosis, persistent foramen ovale (PFO), ventricular
septal defect, pericardial agenesis, persistent left cranial vena cava or Ebstein’s anomaly, which could impact outcome, it is important to
carefully evaluate each case to determine if correction of the CTD will resolve the clinical signs and lead to a favourable outcome for the
patient . Diagnosis of CTD benefits from a multimodal diagnostic imaging approach in order to more precisely characterize this complex
cardiovascular anomaly and to assist in determining the most appropriate treatment. This report describes the characterization of a case of
CTD in a puppy using various imaging modalities. A 10-week-old, male intact Golden Retriever (body weight 4.02 kg) was referred to the
Veterinary Medical Centre of the Western College of Veterinary Medicine, Canada with clinical signs of stunted growth, anorexia, and a
progressively distended abdomen. Previous thoracic and abdominal radiographs performed by the referring veterinarian revealed marked CdVC
dilation and hepatomegaly. The dog was owned by a breeder and born to a clinically normal dam and sire. There were 10 puppies in the litter,
the remainder of which were healthy based on assessment by the referring veterinarian at multiple assessment time points for routine
vaccinations and deworming. On physical examination, a pendulous and distended abdomen that was tense on palpation was appreciated. Despite
being tachypnoeic and tachycardic, lung sounds were deemed normal on auscultation and there was no audible heart murmur, arrhythmia or
jugular vein distension. No abnormalities were detected on a six lead electrocardiogram. The mucous membranes were pale but moist with a
normal capillary refill time. A complete blood count and serum biochemistry profile revealed a mild hypoalbuminemia (29 g/l) and a moderate
microcytic hypochromic anaemia (Hct: 22%) with evidence of marked regeneration. Pre- and postprandial serum bile acids were normal. Repeat
thoracic radiographs (Fig. 1) showed the presence of a severely distended and tortuous CdVC (CdVC/aortic ratio >1.5), kinking of the CdVC at
the level of the cardiac base with a bulge of the cardiac silhouette at the level of the RA, and mild right heart enlargement. The pulmonary
vasculature and airways were unremarkable. In the cranial abdomen, severe hepatomegaly and reduced abdominal serosal detail suggestive of
ascites was noted. Abdominal ultrasound confirmed severe CdVC dilation, marked congestion of the hepatic veins, severe hepatomegaly and the
presence of a small amount of free abdominal fluid. In addition, an incidental cholelith within the gall bladder was detected.
Echocardiography showed a large spherical, thick-walled chamber filled with hypoechoic fluid at the level of the cavoatrial junction
compressing both normal atria laterally in the right parasternal short axis view (Fig. 2).Fig. 1 a Right lateral and b dorsoventral
radiograph of the thorax. Note the tortuous, severely distended CdVC and bulge of the cardiac silhouette at the level of the RA
Fig. 2Echocardiography demonstrating a right long axis view and b right parasternal short axis view. a Large rounded thick walled structure
(asterisk) at the cavoatrial junction is seen between both ‘normal’ atria a Right lateral and b dorsoventral radiograph of the thorax. Note
the tortuous, severely distended CdVC and bulge of the cardiac silhouette at the level of the RA Echocardiography demonstrating a right long
axis view and b right parasternal short axis view. a Large rounded thick walled structure (asterisk) at the cavoatrial junction is seen
between both ‘normal’ atria With Doppler-ultrasound no active flow was noted within this chamber, which was identified as the cranial
extension of the CdVC. Based on these preliminary findings it was suspected that this dilation of the CdVC was walled-off completely from
the ‘normal’ RA by a membrane at the cavo-atrial junction leading to a presumptive diagnosis of CTD with an imperforate atrial membrane. No
other concurrent cardiac anomalies were appreciated. Contrast-enhanced echocardiography (‘bubble study’) was performed to help determine if
there was any potential communication between either the cranial vena cava (CrVC) and the CdVC and the RA, respectively. When agitated
saline was injected into the right cephalic vein, microbubbles were immediately identified in the RA confirming normal communication between
the CrVC and the RA. However, when agitated saline was injected into the left lateral saphenous vein a lot of microbubbles were identified
passing through the RA into the right ventricle despite only a few microbubbles seen reaching the distended cranial extent of CdVC at the
level of the heart. In the mid abdominal CdVC, at the level of the diaphragm, a larger number of microbubbles were seen pooling and flowing
retrograde on inhalation without sustained forward motion. This finding suggested that there was no communication between the CdVC and the
RA and that the microbubbles had reached the right heart through an alternate venous pathway. A non-selective venous angiogram with Iohexol
(Omnipaque®, 240 mg I/ml, dose 2 ml/kg) contrast injected into the left lateral saphenous vein confirmed obstruction of venous return to the
heart through the CdVC with no contrast identified cranial to L2. Contrast was also identified within the distended right azygos vein, which
was seen to empty directly into the RA. Computed tomography angiography (CTA) of the thorax and abdomen using a 16-slice helical CT scanner
(Toshiba Aquilion 16, Toshiba Medical Systems) was performed under general anaesthesia. Images with 1 mm slice thickness were acquired
before, immediately after and 1, 2 and 3 min after injection of Iohexol contrast into the left lateral saphenous vein. Axial compression of
the right atrial chamber against the left atrium and a flat crescent-shaped tissue barrier between the CdVC and the left atrium in sagittal
orientation was appreciated (Fig. 3).Fig. 3 a Sagittal, b transverse and c dorsal images in a soft tissue window level 3 min post contrast
injection. Fine mineral dense material (dagger) is seen within the wall between the dilated right atrial compartment (asterisk) and left
atrium. Severe dilation of the CdVC, right azygos vein (rAV) and generalized hepatomegaly are noted a Sagittal, b transverse and c dorsal
images in a soft tissue window level 3 min post contrast injection. Fine mineral dense material (dagger) is seen within the wall between the
dilated right atrial compartment (asterisk) and left atrium. Severe dilation of the CdVC, right azygos vein (rAV) and generalized
hepatomegaly are noted The anomalous tissue was composed of a fine linear accumulation of irregular mineral dense material (±345 HU) over an
area of approximately H 22 × L 16 mm. On ultrasound, this area had been visualized as hyperechoic tissue with distal acoustic shadowing
consistent with mineralization. Following contrast injection, a markedly distended right azygos vein was seen from the level of T12
cranially to where it drained into the cranial part of the RA. Caudal to the heart the intrathoracic CdVC was markedly dilated measuring
14 mm in diameter and 30 × 23 mm at the junction with the RA (compared to the aortic diameter of 6.3 mm at the same level). The CdVC
dilation extended across the diaphragm into the abdomen with marked dilation of the hepatic veins. Severe hepatomegaly with liver lobes
extending caudal to the level of L5 was present along with persistent extensive contrast enhancement of the liver with sequential studies
confirming obstruction of hepatic venous return to the heart and secondary hepatic congestion. Multifocal stippled mineralization of the
hepatic parenchyma within the caudate liver lobe and the previously appreciated gall bladder cholelith were also apparent. A cardiac MRI
study with a 1.5 T magnet (Symphony, Siemens) was also performed to permit further structural and functional assessment of the heart and
major thoracic vasculature. The dog was positioned in sternal recumbency with two phased array coils around the thorax, one head coil
cranial to the heart and an additional spine coil at the level of the heart. Cine sequences were retrospectively P-wave gated with a
protocol for arrhythmia since ECG-gaiting could not be obtained due to magnetic interference. Images were acquired using a dark blood
technique. For this purpose, T1 turbo spin echo (TSE) sequences (TE: 28 TR: 700) depicting the cardiac and vascular morphology, as well as
T2 TSE (TE: 87 TR: 800) and HASTE (single shot) sequences (TE: 33 TR: 800, FOV 300, Matrix 106x 256, Slice thickness 5–6 mm) were obtained.
For the purpose of visualization of the cardiac and vascular hemodynamic function during the cardiac cycle, 12 slice (True FISP, balanced
sequence) Cine sequences were acquired in 2D volumes. Furthermore, a velocity encoded technique to demonstrate vascular flow (150 cm/s)
through the sagittal plane was acquired with a FLASH (incoherent gradient echo-gradient spoiled) sequence (TE: 4.2 TR: 36). A thick membrane
separating the spherical end of the CdVC from the cranial right atrial chamber and walling it off to the left atrium was confirmed
(Fig. 4).Fig. 4Cardiac MRI in a FLASH and b True FISP bright blood and c HASTE dark blood flow sequence. Note that no blood flow is seen
within the cranial end of the CdVC (asterisk). Blood is flowing through the dilated right azygos vein (rAV) Cardiac MRI in a FLASH and b
True FISP bright blood and c HASTE dark blood flow sequence. Note that no blood flow is seen within the cranial end of the CdVC (asterisk).
Blood is flowing through the dilated right azygos vein (rAV) The blood flow from the CrVC, as well as from the distended right azygos vein,
through the sinus venarum cavarum and into the cranial RA and into the right ventricle was unimpeded. Emptying of the coronary sinus into
the cranial right atrial compartment also appeared normal. No vascular flow between the CdVC and RA was appreciated during all phases of the
cardiac cycle again confirming the complete obstruction of normal caudal venous return to the RA. Human pediatric cardiologists consulted
regarding this case advised that interventional treatment using balloon dilation or a cutting balloon was not a viable option so two weeks
later surgical correction of the anomaly under total venous inflow occlusion with mild induced hypothermia was performed. The heart was
accessed through a right 5th intercostal space thoracotomy and 100 ml of mildly cloudy pleural effusion were suctioned from the thoracic
cavity. Intraoperatively the blind-ended pouch of the CdVC measured 4–5 cm in diameter and appeared continuous with the caudal wall of the
cranial right atrial compartment (Fig. 5).Fig. 5View through right lateral thoracotomy and pericardiotomy. a The markedly distended
spherical cranial end of the caudal vena cava (asterisk) and right atrium (RA). b Right atriotomy under total inflow occlusion with partial
excision of the anomalous membrane (dagger) View through right lateral thoracotomy and pericardiotomy. a The markedly distended spherical
cranial end of the caudal vena cava (asterisk) and right atrium (RA). b Right atriotomy under total inflow occlusion with partial excision
of the anomalous membrane (dagger) A normal intact thoracic duct could be identified dorsal to the CrVC. Following atriotomy, a part of the
membrane separating the CdVC and RA was excised creating an opening of about 1–2 cm in diameter. The total inflow occlusion time was 2 min
and the heart kept beating throughout. Immediately after restoration of the venous flow, marked reduction of CdVC dilation and improved
filling of the RA was observed. Recovery from anaesthesia was uneventful. Postoperatively the dog was started on low-dose aspirin to reduce
the risk of thrombus formation (5 mg/kg PO q 24 h for 7 days) and was discharged 5 days after surgery. Postoperative follow-up
echocardiography performed one week later revealed normal cardiac function with persistent patency of the membranostomy orifice, measuring
7.6 mm in diameter. Persistent mild distension of the CdVC where it entered the heart was appreciated, however, the distension of the
remainder of the thoracic and abdominal portions of the CdVC had resolved. Normal filling of both atria was re-established and the pleural
effusion had resolved but a small amount of peritoneal effusion around the liver lobes could still be appreciated. One month later,
echocardiographic reassessment showed that the membranostomy orifice had remained patent measuring 10 mm in diameter. Cardiac function and
CdVC size remained normal. After this the dog gradually returned to normal activity, growing fast and showing normal exercise tolerance.
Over a period of more than 2 years follow-up the dog has continued to do well and has never shown any exercise intolerance during routine
flyball and duck hunting activity. This case report provides a description of a rare congenital cardiac abnormality resulting in a triatrial
heart partitioned by an imperforate membrane from the CdVC. Unique aspects of this case are the unusual location of the separating membrane
and concurrent mineralization of the CdVC and hepatic parenchyma. During embryological primary septation of the heart, the sinus venosus is
formed by the distal part of the bent tube. The right horn of the sinus venosus gradually incorporates itself into the cranial part of the
RA forming at a later stage the smooth sinus of the caval veins. The original embryologic RA forms the trabeculated caudal portion of the
ultimate RA. The two portions of the RA are connected through a sinoatrial orifice, which initially is covered by the right and left venous
valves on either side. The left venous valve ultimately becomes a part of the septum secundum while the right venous valve continues to
divide the RA into two chambers and directs oxygenated blood entering the heart from the CdVC across the foramen ovale to the left atrium
during foetal life. By 12 weeks post gestation in humans this sheet of tissue that represents the right sinus venosus valve normally
regresses. After regression, the crista terminalis remains cranially and the Eustachian valve, the valve of the CdVC and the Thebesian
valve, the valve of the coronary sinus, remain caudally (Fig. 6) .Fig. 6This figure demonstrates the flow of oxygenated blood from the sinus
venosus into the left atrium (arrows) and components of the right sinus venosus valve after regression. Regression failure of the Eustachian
valve (hatched), results in separation of the caudal vena cava from the right atrium (RA) This figure demonstrates the flow of oxygenated
blood from the sinus venosus into the left atrium (arrows) and components of the right sinus venosus valve after regression. Regression
failure of the Eustachian valve (hatched), results in separation of the caudal vena cava from the right atrium (RA) Persistence of this
right sinus venosus valve, which is the basis for the anomaly seen with classic CTD, results in separation of the RA into two compartments
in the adult heart. We hypothesize that regression failure of only the caudal portion of the right sinus venosus valve, the Eustachian
valve, that is the former valve of the CdVC, lead to the unique location of the imperforate membrane in our dog (Fig. 6). In a triatrial
heart, the two distinct compartments of the RA can be completely separated by an imperforate membrane or communicate through an orifice of
variable size if the membrane is perforate. The hemodynamic consequences with CTD will vary with the degree of obstruction, e.g. complete
vs. incomplete, and with the size of the opening if perforate . With classic CTD the cranial RA has normal physiologic pressures and
receives the venous drainage from the cranial half of the body from the CrVC. In the case described, the venous return from the CrVC,
coronary sinus, and right azygos vein to the true RA were not impeded. If the membrane is perforated, high-pressured flow will also enter
the true RA from the CdVC. However, the increased resistance impeding caudal venous return will lead to signs of caudal right-sided CHF
(i.e., hepatic venous congestion, ascites) without evidence of cranial right-sided CHF signs (i.e., jugular vein distension). If the
membrane is imperforated, like in this case, which is described less frequently than the perforated form [3, 8, 9], no communication exists
between the two right atrial compartments divided by the anomalous membrane. Thrombotic or nonthrombotic obstruction of the hepatic venous
outflow results in the classic triad of hepatomegaly, ascites, and abdominal pain secondary to development of postsinusoidal portal
hypertension. For this reason, some authors term the resultant caudal right-sided CHF a Budd-Chiari-like syndrome. In our dog, the degree of
hepatomegaly, dilation of the CdVC and the size of the anomalous caudal right atrial compartment was very profound compared to previously
reported cases of imperforate CTD in dogs [3, 8–10]. Dogs with imperforate septa tend to form anomalous collateral vessels connecting the
CdVC either directly to the right azygos vein or indirectly to the right azygos vein via the vertebral or intercostal venous circulation [8,
9, 11, 12]. In this case, indirect azygos continuation of the CdVC was found with suspected shunting through anastomosis with the vertebral
venous circulation. Development of these collateral pathways permits some degree of decompression of the high-pressure caudal venous
compartment. In some cases of CTD further decompression through the coronary sinus, or through concurrent PFO or ASD, which further function
as effective pop-off valves, have been reported. Our dog lacked the additional latter possibilities for decompression. We speculate that the
imperforate membrane with absence of additional ‘vents’ resulted in more extensive hemodynamic consequences resulting in severe
postsinusoidal hypertension which could not be sufficiently compensated for by the collateral azygos continuation. Computed tomography
revealed the presence of multifocal mineral foci in the hepatic lobes in our dog. Degenerative mineralization secondary to severe hepatic
congestion is a possible explanation. Hepatic bridging fibrosis and necrosis has been found on histopathological examination in two other
cases of CTD [3, 13]. The cholelith formation in the gall bladder seen in such a young dog was suggestive of chronic cholestasis likely
related to chronic hepatic congestion. Mineralization of the ascending aorta, coronary arteries, aortic and mitral valves as a result of
chronic degenerative changes and pathological calcium phosphate deposition in dogs, are often of unknown etiology [14, 15]. We did not find
a predisposing disease for the CdVC wall mineralization seen in our dog. Echocardiographic examination in combination with angiography has
established the diagnosis of CTD in many previous cases, although in some dogs cross-sectional imaging with other modalities has been
required [6, 8, 16]. In the present case echocardiography allowed the detection of the congenital anomaly, however, CT and cardiac MRI
facilitated a better understanding of the anatomy, relationship between anatomical structures, altered vascularization and the hemodynamic
consequences of the anomaly with respect to the cardiovascular system. An accurate anatomic characterization of the anomaly and great
vessels is essential for directing the most appropriate treatment option in these cases. Cardiac MRI has proven an excellent non-invasive
diagnostic tool for the identification and characterization of congenital heart defects in man . It has inherent advantages facilitating the
morphological and hemodynamic assessment of the heart and major vasculature during stages of the cardiac cycle, allows for identification of
concurrent extracardiac anomalies that might be present and provides better spatial resolution and superior tissue contrast compared with
echocardiography. This has also reduced the requirement for radiographic angiography and the associated dangers for the subject and
clinician . To date cardiac MRI is rarely used in the veterinary field yet with developing technology previous limitations like size of the
patient, acquisition time and fast heart rate (compared with man) can increasingly be overcome. For a positive long-term outcome balloon
dilatation [5, 8, 19, 20], including cutting balloon techniques or surgical correction under inflow occlusion or extracorporal circulation
[2, 4, 10, 21, 22] have been reported as the treatment of choice. In our dog, surgical membranostomy under inflow occlusion was successfully
performed. The election of the surgical technique was based on the imperforate nature and the severe thickness of the membrane, which might
have lead to complications with the balloon dilatation technique, as seen in previous reports [3, 19]. atrial septal defect caudal vena cava
congestive heart failure cranial vena cava computed tomography computed tomography angiography cor triatriatum dexter electrocardiogram fast
imaging with steady-state free precession fast low angle shot field of view half-Fourier acquisition single-shot turbo spin-echo hematokrit
hounsfield unit magnet resonance imaging persistent foramen ovale per os right atrium right azygos vein echo time repetition time turbo spin
echo TPD wrote the first draft and final version of the manuscript. Radiographs, CT and MRI studies were performed and evaluated by TPD and
angiography, initial and follow-up echocardiography were performed and evaluated by GS. GS supervised all diagnostic imaging studies, ECRS
managed the case and supervised the clinical examination and KL performed surgery and supervised the postoperative management. ECRS and GS
provided critical review of the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. The authors want to thank Dr. José N. Matos
for assistance in interpretation of the echocardiography, all the veterinary students involved in the management of the case and the human
pediatric cardiologists Dr. Pharis Scott and Dr. Ashok Kakadekar for review of the case and advice on the surgical treatment. The authors
declare that they have no competing interests. This study did not require official or institutional ethical approval. The animal was handled
according to good ethical standards and Canadian legislation.
