*Won Hoon Song and Sung Han Kim contributed equally to this work. One of the most significant risk factors for prostate cancer (PC) is a
family history of the disease, with germ-line mutations in the breast cancer predisposition gene (BRCA) 2 conferring the highest risk. We
here report a 56-year-old man presented with painful gait disturbance and diagnosed PC with multiple disseminated bone metastases. The
patient had a strong family history of breast cancer with his 2 nieces affected. Furthermore, his aunts and uncles from both sides were
diagnosed with stomach, ovarian, and colorectal cancers. His genomic sequencing analysis of the BRCA genes revealed the same BRCA2
deleterious mutation that his breast cancer-affected nieces carried. Previous studies have suggested that BRCA2-mutated PC is associated
with a more aggressive phenotype and poor prognosis. Our experience in the present case also indicated the urgent needs for novel treatment
modality and PC screening in this high-risk group of patients. One of the most significant risk factors for prostate cancer (PC) is a family
history of the disease. To date, germ-line mutations in the breast cancer predisposition gene (BRCA) 2 are the genetic events that have been
shown to confer the highest risk of PC at 8.6-fold in men ≤ 65 years of age (1). Although it remains unclear how BRCA2 affect prostate
tumorigenesis, deleterious mutations in BRCA2 genes have been associated with a more aggressive disease and poor clinical outcomes.
Furthermore, the increasing incidence of PC worldwide emphasizes the urgent need for new methods of outcome prediction and patient
stratification, particularly to identify those with potentially lethal forms of the disease. We herein present a case of BRCA2-mutated PC
with a family history of breast cancer. In addition, we reviewed the literature on germ-line mutations of the BRCA genes and their
predictive values of patient outcomes. A 56-year-old patient presented with gait disturbance due to pain in the right leg in September 2015.
His prostate-specific antigen (PSA) level was 3,566 ng/mL, and he was diagnosed with PC with multiple disseminated bone metastases in the
whole axial and proximal appendicular skeleton (Fig. 1). The Gleason score on diagnosis was 9 (4 + 5) (Fig. 2). The digital rectal
examination revealed a hard tender prostate estimated to weigh 40 g with left-sided extraprostatic extension but no rectal invasion. He was
treated with hormonal therapy, including 50 mg nonsteroidal antiandrogen therapy once daily combined with an 11.25 mg injection of a
gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) agonist. After 2 months of therapy, his bone pain subsided, and his PSA level decreased to 740 ng/mL.
His family pedigree revealed a strong history of breast cancer with his 2 nieces being diagnosed at the age of 36 and 39 years (Fig. 2).
Furthermore, he had 2 aunts and 2 uncles from both sides who had been diagnosed with stomach cancer, ovarian cancer, or colorectal cancer.
His genomic sequencing analysis of the BRCA genes revealed the same BRCA2 NM_000059.3:c.3744_3747delTGAG (p.Ser1248Argfs*10) mutation that
his breast cancer-affected nieces carried (Fig. 3). Further PC surveillance, including digital rectal examination and PSA screening, was
planned for the patient's male relatives. Preoperative prostate MRI and bone scan images. (A) Sagittal view; (B) horizontal view; (C) axial
view of MRI of the prostate showing left side-dominant PC with extracapsular extension, seminal vesicle invasion, and enlarged left external
and internal iliac lymph nodes; and (D) Disseminated bone metastasis in the whole axial and proximal appendicular bones. MRI = magnetic
resonance imaging, PC = prostate cancer. Representative microphotographs of the prostate tumor. (A) Characteristic features of Gleason
patterns 4 and 5, including fused glands and an almost complete loss of glandular lumina (H & E staining, [× 100]). (B) Immunohistochemical
staining of BRCA2 (× 200). BRCA2 = breast cancer predisposition gene 2, H & E = hematoxylin and eosin. Pedigree. The patient's mother died
from a car accident at 45 years of age. His first aunt died from ovarian cancer, and her son from biliary cancer. His second aunt died from
colorectal cancer. The 2 daughters of his elder sister were diagnosed with breast cancer at 39 and 36 years of age, and their gene
sequencing analyses revealed that both had BRCA2 mutation NM_000059.3:c.3744_3747delTGAG (p.Ser1248Argfs*10). BRCA2 = breast cancer
predisposition gene 2. Informed written consent was submitted by the patient and the review was exempted by the Institutional Review Board
of the National Cancer Center.(August 25, 2015) The role of BRCA germ-line mutations in male cancer has been extensively studied although
they are present in only 1%–2% of sporadic PC cases (1). Previous studies have estimated the relative risk for developing PC in men from the
families with a pathogenic BRCA2 mutation to be 2.9–4.8 with an approximate 20% lifetime risk and a relative risk as high as 7.3 in some
subgroups such as those < 65 years old (1). BRCA2 is a tumor suppressor gene inherited in an autosomal dominant fashion with incomplete
penetrance (2). Its function seems to be limited to DNA recombination and repair processes, whereas a loss of function is associated with
deficiency in repairing DNA double-strand breaks. Such a genomic instability might be the underlying cause of cancer predisposition resulted
from deleterious mutations in the BRCA genes. Although the precise biology of BRCA2-associated aggressive PC phenotype remains to be
determined, it has been suggested that in PC cells, BRCA2 downregulation by small interfering RNAs might promote cancer cell migration and
invasion, possibly via the upregulation of matrix metalloproteinase (3). In addition to a more aggressive tumor phenotype and more advanced
tumor stage (T3–4), prostate tumors from BRCA2 mutation carriers are usually more poorly differentiated. These patients often have a shorter
median cancer-specific and overall survival than non-carriers receiving similar local treatment with curative intent (4). However, even the
non-carriers have a poorer outcome than others with sporadic PC, suggesting that a family history of breast cancer might also affect the
prognosis of PC patients. These findings strongly support the contribution of other undetermined genetic factors to PC etiology and
prognosis in breast cancer-prone families (56), and suggest that the family members who do not carry the deleterious BRCA family-specific
mutation might inherit other underlying genetic instabilities that increase their risk of cancer. A recent study by Dite et al. (7)
indicated that first-degree relatives of women diagnosed with breast cancer at a young age (≤ 35 years) had an increased risk of developing
a variety of cancers, irrespective of mutation status, and that some other underlying familial factors in these families, such as variants
in other genes, might predispose individuals to cancer. Currently, there is no consensus on the most appropriate treatment for localized PC
in BRCA mutation carriers, and more clinical evidence is still needed. Nonetheless, radical treatment with either surgery or radiotherapy is
preferable to active surveillance, even for low-risk cases. Previous studies have also supported adjuvant treatment in BRCA mutation
carriers as they often experience early nodal spread and more frequent metastasis (4). One of the most important clinical issues in the
treatment of BRCA-related tumors is the choice of chemotherapy in both adjuvant and palliative settings. Platinum, taxanes, and more
recently, poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP) inhibitors have been demonstrated to be active in breast and ovarian tumors harboring germ-
line mutations of the BRCA genes, although its roles in PC would need further investigation (489). However, in clinical practice, it is
questionable whether screening for BRCA mutations is necessary because their prevalence is low, and BRCA-positive PC patients with
metastatic disease have been reported to respond to the standard chemotherapy regimen of docetaxel plus prednisolone similarly to those with
wild-type BRCA (10). Additional considerations for deciding whether to undergo further treatment for metastatic PC include health insurance
coverage; it is uncertain if a PARP inhibitor for treatment of PC would be covered by insurance plans because the role of PARP inhibitors in
PC has not yet been clarified. While PC screening in men might be controversial (4), these findings suggested that genetically targeted
testing of pre-symptomatic men with a higher risk of aggressive and fatal PC like those from families with BRCA2 mutation carriers might be
clinically justified (567). Early diagnosis might be crucial in these patients, and a careful discussion about PC screening with an
experienced urologist should be encouraged to inform both BRCA2 mutation carriers and non-carriers alike that due to their underlying
genetic changes, they might be at an increased risk of developing clinically significant PC that could be difficult to manage and have a
poor clinical outcome. Funding: This study was supported by the Korean National Cancer Center Grants (No. 1510170). DISCLOSURE: The authors
have no potential conflicts of interest to disclose. AUTHOR CONTRIBUTION: Conceptualization: Kim SH, Joung JY, Lee KH. Data curation: Song
WH, Kim SH, Park WS. Investigation: Song WH, Kim SH, Park WS. Writing - review & editing: Joung JY, Park WS, Seo HK, Chung J, Lee KH.
