Haploinsufficiency of the GATA6 transcription factor gene was recently found to be the most common cause of pancreatic agenesis, a rare
cause of neonatal diabetes mellitus. Although most cases are de novo, we describe three siblings with inherited GATA6 haploinsufficiency and
the rare finding of parental mosaicism. The proband was born at term with severe intrauterine growth restriction, the first child of non-
consanguineous parents. Diabetes occurred on day of life 1 with pancreatic exocrine insufficiency noted at several months of age. Pancreatic
agenesis with absent gallbladder was confirmed when he underwent congenital diaphragmatic hernia and intestinal malrotation repair. A patent
ductus arteriosus and pulmonary stenosis were repaired in infancy. Neurocognitive development has been normal. A second pregnancy was
terminated due to tetralogy of Fallot and pulmonary hypoplasia secondary to congenital diaphragmatic hernia. The fetus also demonstrated
severe pancreatic hypoplasia, gallbladder agenesis and intestinal rotation abnormalities. Despite severe hypoplasia, the pancreas
demonstrated normal islet histology. Another sibling was found to have multiple cardiac abnormalities, requiring procedural intervention.
Given the proband’s spectrum of congenital anomalies, Sanger sequencing of the GATA6 gene was performed, revealing a novel heterozygous
c.635_660del frameshift mutation (p.Pro212fs). The mutation is predicted to be pathogenic, resulting in inclusion of a premature stop codon
and likely degradation of the gene transcript by nonsense-mediated decay. The abortus and the sibling with the cardiac defect were both
found to have the mutation, while the father and remaining sibling were negative. The mother, who is healthy with no evidence of diabetes or
cardiac disease, is mosaic for the mutation at a level of 11% in her peripheral leukocytes by next-generation sequencing. We highlight a
rare mechanism of pancreatic agenesis, this being only the second report of parental mosaicism for a GATA6 mutation and one of a handful of
inherited cases. We also further define the phenotypic variability of GATA6 haploinsufficiency, even in individuals carrying the same
mutation. Mutations in GATA6 should be strongly considered in cases of diabetes due to pancreatic hypoplasia or agenesis, and potentially
affected family members should be tested regardless of phenotype. Although type 1 diabetes mellitus accounts for the vast majority of
pediatric diabetes, monogenic forms account for up to 4% of cases [1, 2]. The latter are due to single gene defects affecting pancreatic
β-cell function, development or survival and include neonatal diabetes mellitus (NDM). NDM is defined as diabetes occurring in the first six
months of life and occurs with an estimated frequency of approximately 1:100 000 live births . Both transient and permanent forms of NDM
exist (Table 1). Although clinically indistinguishable from each other at presentation, most transient cases resolve at a median age of
12 weeks but relapse in 50–60% [6, 7]. Different genetic loci and genes are associated with transient versus permanent NDM. Methylation
abnormalities at chromosome 6q24 account for two thirds of transient cases, while in permanent NDM, activating mutations in ABCC8 and KCNJ11
are the most common genetic defects in outbred populations and EIF2AK3 is the most frequent in consanguineous groups [3, 7]. KCNJ11 and
ABCC8 encode the KIR6.2 and SUR1 subunits of the KATP channel, respectively, which links glucose metabolism to insulin secretion. EIF2AK3
encodes a kinase involved in regulating the endoplasmic reticulum stress response to misfolded proteins [8, 9]. Although the mechanism
causing diabetes is unclear, defects in EIF2AK3 may cause ER stress in the β-cell from misfolded proteins due to the high demand for insulin
secretion, eventually leading to β-cell apoptosis. Alternatively, diabetes may be linked to reduced β-cell proliferation with abnormal
insulin trafficking and secretion, as observed in EIF2AK3 knockout mice .Table 1Key genes associated with neonatal diabetes
mellitusGeneLocationInheritanceClinical features PLAGL1, HYMAI 6q24Variable (imprinting)Transient NDM± Macroglossia, ± Umbilical
Hernia, ± Other features if part of generalized hypomethylation syndrome KCNJ11 11p15.1De novo, Dominant or RecessivePermanent or Transient
NDM, ± Developmental delay, epilepsy, neonatal diabetes (DEND) syndrome ABCC8 11p15.1De novo, Dominant or RecessiveTransient or Permanent
NDM, ± DEND syndrome EIF2AK3 6q22.1RecessiveWolcott-Rallison Syndrome:Permanent NDMShort statureBone dysplasiaHepatic dysfunction INS
11p15.5RecessiveIsolated permanent or transient NDM GCK 7p15-p13RecessiveIsolated permanent NDMThe most common genes associated with
neonatal diabetes mellitus are described with key clinical features and mode of inheritance. Adapted from . Genes associated with abnormal
pancreas development are described in Table 2 Key genes associated with neonatal diabetes mellitus The most common genes associated with
neonatal diabetes mellitus are described with key clinical features and mode of inheritance. Adapted from . Genes associated with abnormal
pancreas development are described in Table 2 Permanent NDM can also result from pancreatic agenesis or hypoplasia, which has been linked to
mutations in transcription factors important for pancreatic and β-cell development. The most common of these is GATA6 . Other causes include
mutations in PDX1 and the PTF1A enhancer causing isolated abnormal pancreas development, while mutations in PTF1A, RFX6, HNF1B and GATA4 are
associated with both pancreatic and extra-pancreatic abnormalities (Table 2) . GATA6 is one of a family of evolutionarily conserved
transcription factors recognizing the A/T-GATA-A/G consensus sequence, with key roles in the development and differentiation of multiple
cell lineages and tissues [17, 18]. Heterozygous inactivating mutations in GATA6 were identified through a whole exome sequencing strategy
in 15/27 (56%) individuals with pancreatic agenesis, defined as NDM requiring insulin treatment and exocrine pancreatic insufficiency
requiring enzyme replacement. This is a syndromic form of NDM associated with extra-pancreatic features including cardiac, hepatobiliary,
gastrointestinal, neurocognitive and other endocrine involvement. Since its initial discovery, the phenotypic spectrum of GATA6
haploinsufficiency in humans has proven to be more diverse than initially appreciated, and although the initial cases were de novo, several
instances of inherited GATA6 mutations have now been described . This report describes three siblings with inherited GATA6
haploinsufficiency and the rare finding of parental mosaicism.Table 2Genes associated with neonatal diabetes mellitus and abnormal pancreas
developmentGeneLocationInheritanceClinical featuresReference PDX1 13q12.1RecessiveIUGR, Pancreatic agenesis, Permanent NDM, PI PTF1A
enhancer10p12.2RecessiveIUGR, Pancreatic agenesis, Permanent NDM, PI PTF1A 10p12.2RecessiveIUGR, Pancreatic agenesis, Permanent NDM,
variable PI, Cerebellar hypoplasia/aplasia RFX6 6q22.1RecessiveIUGR, Annular/hypoplastic pancreas, Permanent NDM, Chronic diarrhea, Biliary
and intestinal abnormalities[14, 32–35] HNF1B 17q21.3DominantIUGR, Pancreas hypoplasia, Renal cysts GATA4 8p23.1DominantIUGR, Pancreatic
hypoplasia/agenesis, Congenital heart defects, Developmental delayGenes in addition to GATA6 associated with both isolated diabetes and
extra-pancreatic features are described with key clinical features and mode of inheritance Genes associated with neonatal diabetes mellitus
and abnormal pancreas development Genes in addition to GATA6 associated with both isolated diabetes and extra-pancreatic features are
described with key clinical features and mode of inheritance The proband was born at 37 weeks gestation after a pregnancy complicated by
severe intrauterine growth restriction, reflected in the birth weight of 1.74 kg (<3rd percentile, −4 standard deviations). He was the first
child of non-consanguineous parents of French Canadian background. Hyperglycemia occurred within the first 12 h of life and neonatal
diabetes mellitus was diagnosed. An initial ultrasound visualized only the head of the pancreas, suggesting pancreatic hypoplasia. He was
placed on subcutaneous insulin therapy with adequate glycemic control. Moderate valvular pulmonary stenosis and a patent ductus arteriosus
(PDA) were also diagnosed and valvuloplasty was performed in the neonatal period. At several months of age, recurrent episodes of
hypoglycemia with decreasing insulin requirements began to occur. He was diagnosed with pancreatic exocrine insufficiency (PI) based on the
recurrent hypoglycemia, poor weight gain and low stool fecal elastase, leading to initiation of pancreatic enzyme replacement. At 8 months
of age, he was readmitted for severe failure to thrive and hypoglycemia secondary to inadequately treated PI, heart failure from the
persistent PDA and a previously undiagnosed congenital diaphragmatic hernia. Intestinal malrotation was also noted. His medical management
was optimized and he underwent repair of the PDA, diaphragmatic hernia and intestinal malrotation. At the time of surgery, no pancreatic
tissue or gallbladder could be identified, demonstrating both pancreatic and gallbladder agenesis. Despite improvement in his nutritional
and overall health status, he continued to have episodes of early morning hypoglycemia, presumably due to deficient glucagon secretion. This
was managed with feeds of uncooked cornstarch to provide a source of slowly-released glucose while on insulin injections and, when
transitioned to pump therapy, with low basal insulin rates. Control of both the diabetes and exocrine insufficiency have been adequate with
no evidence of malabsorption. There has been no clinical evidence of other endocrine dysfunction and thyroid function testing has been
normal. He has also demonstrated appropriate neurocognitive development as of 9 years of age. Previous testing of the PDX1 gene, a
recognized cause of pancreatic agenesis (Table 2) as well as broader genetic analysis through the 1,000,000 Single Nucleotide Polymorphism
project were unrevealing. A second pregnancy was terminated at 20 weeks due to complex congenital heart disease. Examination of the abortus
revealed a male fetus with tetralogy of Fallot, congenital diaphragmatic hernia, severe pancreatic hypoplasia, gallbladder agenesis and
intestinal non-rotation (Fig. 1, individual IIB). Subsequently, two male infants were born. The youngest child was found to have a PDA
requiring procedural intervention, left pulmonary artery stenosis, and moderate atrial septal defect (Fig. 1, individual IID). Neither the
remaining sibling nor either parent have any clinical evidence of diabetes, pancreatic exocrine insufficiency or cardiac disease.Fig.
1Family Pedigree. The proband (II-A) and abortus (II-B) have multiple congenital anomalies including severe pancreatic agenesis/hypoplasia,
while one sibling (II-D), also heterozygous for the same mutation, has isolated congenital cardiac anomalies including a PDA, left pulmonary
artery stenosis, moderate atrial septal defect. The father and remaining sibling are negative for the mutation. The genotypes are provided
below each symbol, N denotes the wildtype allele Family Pedigree. The proband (II-A) and abortus (II-B) have multiple congenital anomalies
including severe pancreatic agenesis/hypoplasia, while one sibling (II-D), also heterozygous for the same mutation, has isolated congenital
cardiac anomalies including a PDA, left pulmonary artery stenosis, moderate atrial septal defect. The father and remaining sibling are
negative for the mutation. The genotypes are provided below each symbol, N denotes the wildtype allele Genomic DNA was extracted from
peripheral leukocytes using standard procedures. Exons 2–7 and the exon/intron boundaries of the GATA6 gene were analyzed by Sanger
sequencing as described previously. Exon 1 is a non-coding exon and was not sequenced . Sequencing reactions were run on an ABI3730
capillary machine (Applied Biosystems, Warrington, U.K.) and analyzed using Mutation Surveyor v4.0.6 (SoftGenetics, State College, PA)
(GATA6 nucleotide reference NM_005257.3). Allele frequency was quantified by next-generation sequencing as previously described .
Immunohistochemistry and staining for hematoxylin, phloxine, saffron were performed using standard procedures on slides of pancreatic tissue
obtained at autopsy from the abortus (Fig. 1, individual IIB). For the immunohistochemistry, antibodies were used to detect insulin,
glucagon and somatostatin. Given the similarity between the proband’s spectrum of congenital anomalies and the clinical phenotype of GATA6
mutations, Sanger sequencing of exons 2–7 of the GATA6 gene was performed in peripheral leukocytes. A novel c.635_660del frameshift mutation
(p.Pro212fs) was identified in the proband. The mutation is located in exon 2, within the transcriptional activation domain, and is
predicted to result in inclusion of a premature stop codon and likely degradation of the gene transcript by nonsense-mediated decay
(Fig. 2). The mother, the abortus and the sibling with the congenital heart defect were also found to carry the mutation (Fig. 1). Notably,
the mother, who has no clinical evidence of diabetes, including gestational diabetes or cardiac disease, was found to be mosaic for the
mutation (Fig. 1, individual IA). This was confirmed and quantified by next-generation sequencing, revealing 11% mosaicism in peripheral
blood. The father and the remaining sibling’s testing were negative.Fig. 2Genomic and protein positions of the novel GATA6 mutation. a Exons
2 to 7 with the location of the novel deletion described are shown. b The frameshift resulting from the deletion is shown with its location
in the transcriptional activation domain. The numbers refer to the amino acid position of the latter domain and the DNA-binding zinc fingers
(ZnF) Genomic and protein positions of the novel GATA6 mutation. a Exons 2 to 7 with the location of the novel deletion described are shown.
b The frameshift resulting from the deletion is shown with its location in the transcriptional activation domain. The numbers refer to the
amino acid position of the latter domain and the DNA-binding zinc fingers (ZnF) Histological analysis of the pancreas from the abortus
(Fig. 1, individual IIB) demonstrated well-formed islets despite severe pancreatic hypoplasia (Fig. 3). The majority of islet cells stained
positive for insulin and were surrounded by smaller populations of glucagon and somatostatin positive cells, demonstrating normal islet
morphology.Fig. 3Islet morphology is preserved with appropriate distribution of insulin- and glucagon-positive cells despite severe pancreas
hypoplasia. Pancreas sections from individual II-B in Fig. 1 were stained using haematoxylin, phloxine and saffron staining (a), and
immunohistochemistry for insulin, glucagon and somatostatin (b to d). Islets were identified (a) demonstrating normal morphology with
central insulin (b), peripheral glucagon (c) and somatostatin staining (d). All images were photographed at 200× magnification Islet
morphology is preserved with appropriate distribution of insulin- and glucagon-positive cells despite severe pancreas hypoplasia. Pancreas
sections from individual II-B in Fig. 1 were stained using haematoxylin, phloxine and saffron staining (a), and immunohistochemistry for
insulin, glucagon and somatostatin (b to d). Islets were identified (a) demonstrating normal morphology with central insulin (b), peripheral
glucagon (c) and somatostatin staining (d). All images were photographed at 200× magnification We describe three siblings heterozygous for
the same GATA6 mutation inherited via parental mosaicism, yet with widely different manifestations, further defining the clinical phenotype
associated with this rare disease. Since the initial report of heterozygous GATA6 mutations as the most common cause of pancreatic agenesis
or hypoplasia, a much greater degree of phenotypic variability has been recognized for both pancreatic and extra-pancreatic features [10,
19]. Diabetes mellitus is the most common pancreatic feature in 98% of cases (Table 3). Although the majority of cases present with NDM, in
others diabetes develops later in life or has yet to occur by adulthood. Similarly, although clinical PI has been reported in 81% of cases,
subclinical PI and normal exocrine function have also been described (Table 3) [10, 19, 23]. Of the extra-pancreatic features, cardiac
defects are the most common, in 88% of cases, although gastrointestinal, hepatobiliary, neurodevelopmental and other endocrine involvement
have also been reported (Table 3) [10, 19–21, 23–29]. The family described here illustrates this clinical variability. The proband has NDM
and PI, with significant cardiothoracic, gastrointestinal and biliary involvement. A similar phenotype was seen in the second affected
sibling whereas in contrast, the third sibling has isolated cardiac involvement. Thus, GATA6 haploinsufficiency needs to be strongly
considered as a potential cause in cases of diabetes secondary to abnormal pancreas development and, if confirmed, a thorough, multi-system
assessment, particularly cardiac, should be performed to evaluate for other abnormalities. Consideration should also be given to screening
for glycemic abnormalities in those whom diabetes has not yet developed.Table 3Phenotypic spectrum associated with GATA6
haploinsufficiencyClinical featuresSpectrum and severityPatients with GATA6 mutation, N = 41 (%)Pancreatic Features Diabetes
MellitusNeonatal/adult-onsetTotal 40/41 (98), NDM 33/41 (81)a, Child-onset 4/41 (10)b,Adult-onset 3/41 (7) Exocrine
InsufficiencyClinical/subclinicald Total 33/37 (89)c, Clinical 30/37 (81)Extra-Pancreatic Features CardiacIsolated septal defect/multiple
complex defects36/41 (88) HepatobiliaryGallbladder atresia, biliary atresia13/41 (32) GastrointestinalUmbilical hernia, diaphragmatic
hernia, intestinal malrotation8/41 (20) Other EndocrineHypothyroidism, pituitary agenesis7/41 (17) NeurocognitiveDevelopmentally
appropriate/mild learning difficulties/severe developmental delay13/41 (32) GenitourinaryBicornuate uterus, hydronephrosis, hydroureter2/41
(5)Summary of the pancreatic and extra-pancreatic features of the published cases to date, demonstrating the variability of the phenotype
[10, 19–21, 23–29]. aNDM group includes one case of transient NDM, bchildhood-onset group includes one case of impaired glucose tolerance in
adolescence, cfour cases were excluded as no information on exocrine insufficiency was provided, dsubclinical was defined as low fecal
elastase or positive fecal fat in the absence of clinical symptoms or need for pancreatic enzyme replacement Phenotypic spectrum associated
with GATA6 haploinsufficiency Summary of the pancreatic and extra-pancreatic features of the published cases to date, demonstrating the
variability of the phenotype [10, 19–21, 23–29]. aNDM group includes one case of transient NDM, bchildhood-onset group includes one case of
impaired glucose tolerance in adolescence, cfour cases were excluded as no information on exocrine insufficiency was provided, dsubclinical
was defined as low fecal elastase or positive fecal fat in the absence of clinical symptoms or need for pancreatic enzyme replacement
Although most cases of GATA6 mutations are de novo, several cases of dominant inheritance have been reported [10, 19]. The family described
here is notable for being amongst these inherited cases and moreover, is only the second report of parental mosaicism . In the previous
report, the parent was known to have a congenital heart defect, whereas in our case the mother has no known cardiac abnormalities or
pancreatic phenotype. Presumably differing levels of tissue mosaicism is key. Since three out of four offspring inherited the mutation, the
level of mosaicism is likely significantly higher in the germline compared to other tissues in our case given the absence of other system
involvement and almost certainly higher than the 11% detected in peripheral blood. Accordingly, testing of parents and other potentially
affected family members should be performed, even in individuals without an obvious clinical phenotype. The mechanism underlying the
variable expressivity of GATA6 haploinsufficiency remains unclear with no obvious genotype-phenotype relationship . Histologically, grossly
preserved islet morphology was observed, which contrasts with murine models demonstrating abnormal morphogenesis with failure of progenitor
cells to differentiate into endocrine and exocrine lineages (Fig. 3). However, humans appear to have greater sensitivity to GATA6 gene
dosage as both Gata4 alleles in addition to at least one Gata6 allele must be inactivated in mice to cause pancreatic abnormalities [30,
31]. Although not explored in this report, at a molecular level, there are several potential mechanisms. In vitro studies have shown that
missense mutations affecting highly conserved zinc finger residues result in failure to bind target promoters in luciferase reporter
promoter assays [10, 19, 27]. Given the location of the novel frameshift mutation described here in the transactivation domain, there could
be an impact on downstream genetic targets through altered binding of co-regulatory factors. However, the most likely explanation is that
the introduction of a premature termination codon results in a reduction in GATA6 mRNA transcript levels through nonsense-mediated decay, as
previously described . Variable efficiency of this decay in different tissues could contribute to the phenotypic variability. Modifier
genes, epigenetic mechanisms and environmental factors represent other potential mechanisms that could also contribute to the variability
associated with GATA6 heterozygous mutations. Heterozygous mutations in the GATA6 transcription factor gene are the most common cause of
neonatal diabetes due to pancreatic agenesis. We describe three siblings heterozygous for the same GATA6 mutation inherited via parental
mosaicism, a rare occurrence. Their markedly different manifestations illustrate both the importance of GATA6 for pancreas development as
well as the phenotypic variability of GATA6 haploinsufficiency. Elucidating the mechanisms underlying the phenotype and its variability will
improve our understanding of pancreas development and may provide insights into the mechanisms underlying other forms of abnormal pancreas
development and neonatal diabetes. intrauterine growth restriction neonatal diabetes mellitus patent ductus arteriosus pancreatic exocrine
insufficiency The authors thank the family who participated in this study. We also thank A. Cuellar for his technical assistance regarding
the immunohistochemistry. JJM receives support from the Dr. Eleanor Mackenzie Harpur Pediatric Endowment Fund. The genetic testing in this
report was funded by the Wellcome Trust via a Senior Investigator Award to SE. EDF is a Naomi Berrie Fellow in Diabetes Research. SEF has a
Sir Henry Dale Fellowship jointly funded by the Wellcome Trust and the Royal Society (Grant Number 105636/Z/14/Z). The anonymized data
analyzed during the current study is available from the corresponding author on reasonable request. Primer sequences used for GATA6
sequencing are available in reference 10 and its supplementary information files. JJM conceived of the study. GATA6 testing of the proband
and family was coordinated by JJM and DY. SE, EDF and SF carried out the genetic analysis. MB performed and oversaw the histological
analysis. DY wrote and JJM revised the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. Not applicable. The authors declare
that they have no competing interests. Written informed consent for publication of their clinical details and/or clinical images was
obtained from the parents of the patients. Copies of the consent forms are available for review by the Editor of this journal. The need for
ethics approval from the institutional REB was waived as per provincial ethics and legal requirements. Consent was obtained as outlined
above.
