Correspondence to Dr.　Haruki Koike, koike-haruki@med.nagoya-u.ac.jp A patient with chronic alcoholism presented with myelopathy and low
serum folate and cobalamin levels. A 42-year-old alcoholic man had gait disturbance for 4 months. A neurological examination revealed marked
spasticity with increased deep tendon reflexes and extensor plantar responses of the lower limbs. His cobalamin level was decreased and his
serum folate level was particularly low. His plasma ammonia level was not increased. Abstinence and folic acid and cobalamin supplementation
stopped the progression of his neurological deficits. This case indicates that nutritional deficiency should be monitored closely in
patients with chronic alcoholism who present with myelopathy. The neurological disorders related to alcohol abuse are diverse and affect the
brain, spinal cord, peripheral nervous systems, and muscles (1,2). In addition to the direct toxicity of ethanol and its metabolites,
concomitant nutritional deficiencies may also contribute to the pathogenesis, complicating the neurological manifestations in chronic
alcoholics (1,3). Damage to the spinal cord (myelopathy) has been reported in patients with alcoholism (4,5). As portosystemic blood
shunting associated with liver cirrhosis causes hepatic myelopathy (5-9), it has been considered to be the major cause of myelopathy in
chronic alcoholics. In 1984, Sage et al. reported 5 patients with so called alcoholic myelopathy without substantial liver disease (4). This
report clearly indicated the direct toxicity of ethanol (or its metabolites) as a cause of myelopathy in these alcoholic patients because
their nutritional status, including their folate and cobalamin status, was good. Since then, the possible contribution of nutritional
deficiency has not been extensively examined in alcoholics with myelopathy (2). However, vitamin deficiency, particularly folate deficiency,
has often been reported to occur in chronic alcoholics (3,10). In the present report, we describe the case of a patient with chronic
alcoholism who presented with myelopathy with decreased serum folate and cobalamin levels and discuss the need to recognize nutritional
deficiency in alcoholic patients with myelopathy. A 42-year-old man reported the onset of a gait disturbance 4 months prior to his admission
to our hospital. He had no noteworthy family history. He had been drinking 1.8 L shochu (a clear liquor distilled from sweet potatoes, rice,
or buckwheat) per day and took meals irregularly for 9 months after losing his job. He principally ate instant noodles, which were fortified
in thiamine and riboflavin but not in folic acid or cobalamin. The patient's gait disturbance gradually worsened, and he became almost bed-
ridden 1 month before his admission. One day before his admission to our hospital, he became inarticulate and drowsy. A neurological
examination on admission revealed that the patient was lethargic and had dysarthria and horizontal gaze nystagmus. Mild weakness was
observed diffusely in the lower limbs but was absent in the upper limbs. A slight reduction of tactile sensation was noted in the distal
portions of the lower limbs, whereas the sensations of vibration and joint position were preserved. He complained of distal numbness from
the level of the thigh on both sides. The patient's deep tendon reflexes, including his Achilles tendon reflexes, showed hyperreflexia in
both the upper and lower limbs. Extensor plantar responses were observed on both sides. Ankle clonus was also observed. Autonomic
involvement, such as orthostatic hypotension, gastrointestinal tract dysmotility, dysuria, paridrosis, or dyscoria, was not noted. The
patient's laboratory data revealed a considerably reduced serum folate level (1.3 ng/mL; normal, ≥3.0 ng/mL) (Table). His serum cobalamin
level was also reduced (187 pg/mL; normal, ≥200 pg/mL). On the contrary, his serum copper level was within the normal range, and neither
anemia nor macrocytosis was observed. His whole blood thiamine level was normal. Although a mild increase of γ-glutamyl transpeptidase was
noted, his plasma ammonia level was not increased (35 μg/dL; normal, 38-70 μg/dL). The patient was negative for anti-human T-cell
lymphotropic virus-1, anti-DNA, and anti-nuclear antibodies. A cerebrospinal fluid examination revealed a normal cell count and increased
protein levels (75 mg/dL; normal, 15-45 mg/dL). Laboratory Findings. ND, not determined.8 * Based on a previous report (21). The results of
nerve conduction studies for the median, ulnar, tibial, peroneal, and sural nerves and somatosensory-evoked potentials of the median nerve,
which were performed as reported previously (11,12), revealed normal findings. The central motor conduction time, as assessed using the
previously described methods (13,14), was normal in the median nerve but prominently prolonged in the tibial nerve (24.3 ms; normal, <15
ms). Cranial and spinal cord magnetic resonance imaging revealed no abnormalities. Brain atrophy was not apparent. Abdominal ultrasound
indicated fatty liver with no ascites. Although thiamine (fursultiamine, 75 mg per day) and cobalamin (mecobalamin, 1,500 μg per day)
supplementation was initiated immediately after admission, only a slight improvement in the patient's conscious disturbance was observed.
The administration of folic acid (15 mg per day) was initiated 5 days later, which led to the further recovery of the patient's
consciousness. The patient performed a trail making test (a measure of cognitive function) in 74.9 seconds before folic acid supplementation
(age-adjusted normal value, 22-36 seconds), and 24.3 seconds 28 days later. Although we did not observe the progression of the patient's
gait disturbance, there was no substantial change in the spasticity of the lower limbs at 2 months after the patient's admission. We herein
describe the case of a patient with chronic alcoholism who manifested myelopathy with low serum folate and cobalamin levels (his serum
folate level was particularly low). The patient exhibited gait disturbance due to spasticity of the lower limbs. That the central motor
conduction time in the upper limbs was normal, while that of the lower limbs was prolonged may indicate spinal cord abnormalities. In
addition to the findings suggestive of myelopathy, our patient had consciousness disturbance. Although we did not analyze the nature of
nystagmus that was seen in our patient in detail, it may be related to brain abnormalities. Nutritional deficiencies, including folate and
cobalamin deficiencies, have known to affect various areas of the nervous system, and multiple sites may be concomitantly involved (15-18).
Most previous reports on spastic paraparesis in chronic alcoholics reported that hepatic myelopathy occurred due to portosystemic blood
shunting, which resulted from liver cirrhosis (2). The features of hepatic myelopathy are characterized by progressive spastic paraparesis
and the scarcity of sensory deficits, similar to those of our patient (5,9). However, our patient did not have increased blood ammonia
levels, which would suggest that any portosystemic shunting was not substantial. A previous study described 5 cases of alcoholic myelopathy
in well-nourished myelopathy patients without substantial liver disease (4). These patients also showed spastic paraparesis that was similar
to that observed in patients with hepatic myelopathy (4). As the serum folate and cobalamin levels were reportedly normal in these patients
with so-called alcoholic myelopathy, the direct toxicity of ethanol (or its metabolites) was emphasized. On the contrary, the possible
contribution of nutritional deficiency, particularly folate and cobalamin deficiency as was observed in our patient, has not been
extensively examined in chronic alcoholics with myelopathy (2). Although the direct toxicity of ethanol (or its metabolites) was not
completely ruled out as a cause of myelopathy in our patient, the improvement in the patient's conscious disturbance that was observed after
vitamin supplementation indicates the presence of vitamin deficiency. Although further studies are needed to elucidate the nutritional
status of alcoholic patients with myelopathy, this case report will contribute to the earlier recognition of nutritional deficiency in such
patients. Folate is a B-vitamin that is present in fresh green vegetables, citrus fruits, legumes, and liver but it is easily denatured by
heat during cooking (19,20). Chronic alcohol intake decreases the folate level by inhibiting the absorption of folate from the intestines,
reducing its hepatic stores, and increasing its urinary excretion (10). An unbalanced diet associated with chronic alcoholism may also
contribute to reduced folate intake. Folate deficiency causes a variety of neurological manifestations that poorly correspond to
megaloblastic anemia (21). These features include neural tube defects in embryos, (22), dementia (23), depression (24), optic neuropathy
(25), peripheral neuropathy (21), and myelopathy (26,27). Myelopathy due to folate deficiency is known to lead to the subacute combined
degeneration of the spinal cord (26,27), which is also prominent in individuals with cobalamin deficiency (28). As the features of subacute
combined degeneration usually include deep sensory loss (predominantly in the lower limbs) (26), the relative preservation of the sensory
functions in our patient seems atypical. However, previous studies of patients with folate deficiency have highlighted the incidence of
pyramidal tract damage (29). Hence, the influence of folate deficiency on the clinical manifestations of our patient is possible. Folate
deficiency may also contribute to consciousness disturbance as it has been reported to be closely related to cognitive decline (17). In
1998, the fortification of cereal-grain products with folic acid was initiated in the USA and Canada to prevent neural tube defects; this
action was followed by many countries. However, there are still many countries, including East Asia and European nations, which have not
implemented folic acid fortification. Moreover, a recent study suggested that the level of folate intake remains below the level recommended
for the prevention of neural tube defects in subgroups of the population, even in countries with such mandatory fortification (30,31). Thus,
folate deficiency remains a major public health problem throughout the world, and it is considered to be more prevalent in alcoholics. As
for cobalamin, which was mildly reduced in our patient, the major causes of deficiency are the impaired absorption caused by achlorhydria
and the impairment of intrinsic factors due to atrophic gastritis or gastrectomy (32). However, alcoholism has not been regarded as a cause
of cobalamin deficiency. Cobalamin deficiency induces megaloblastic anemia, cognitive decline, myelopathy, and neuropathy, all of which are
indistinguishable from the symptoms induced by folate deficiency (18,21,28). Because cobalamin deficiency may be present along with other
B-vitamin deficiencies (21), the cobalamin levels should also be monitored carefully in patients with nutritional deficiency. An impediment
to the definitive diagnosis of nutritional deficiency is that laboratory evidence must be obtained before vitamin supplementation or dietary
modification is prescribed. As previous studies have suggested that irreversible neurological deficits might remain in patients with
myelopathy due to nutritional deficiency (17,26), the early diagnosis and treatment of nutritional deficiency in alcoholic patients with
myelopathy is important. Physicians should therefore be aware of the possibility of nutritional deficiency, particularly B-vitamin
deficiencies, as a cause of myelopathy in patients with chronic alcoholism and should monitor their nutritional status carefully. In
particular, folate deficiency may frequently contribute to neurological deficits in patients with alcoholism-associated myelopathy, and the
relationship between folate deficiency and alcohol intake should be carefully considered.
