Correspondence to Dr.　Yukinori Harada, y-harada@healthcoop-nagano.or.jp Few cases of IgA nephropathy with angioimmunoblastic T-cell lymphoma
(AITL) have been reported. We herein present the case of a 79-year-old Japanese man with AITL and IgA nephropathy. The patient presented
with generalized edema, fatigue, and fever. Laboratory investigations revealed polyclonal gammopathy with a high level of IgA, microscopic
hematuria, proteinuria, and some other immunological abnormalities. Computed tomography revealed generalized lymphadenopathy. A diagnosis of
AITL and IgA nephropathy was made based on inguinal lymph node and renal biopsies. Following chemotherapy for AITL, the patient's edema,
microscopic hematuria, and proteinuria were alleviated. These findings indicate that IgA nephropathy may occur in AITL patients.
Angioimmunoblastic T-cell lymphoma (AITL) is a rare tumor that accounts for 1% of all lymphoma cases. It is characterized by the loss of the
lymphoid architecture, the presence of pleomorphic cellular infiltrates, and the proliferation of microvasculature in the lymph nodes.
Patients usually present with fever, generalized lymphadenopathy, skin rash, polyclonal hypergammaglobulinemia, Coombs-positive anemia,
thrombocytopenia, and hypocomplementemia (1). Renal involvement is rare in patients with AITL. However, in some cases involving proteinuria
(2), nephrotic syndrome (3), acute renal failure (4,5), and membranous nephropathy (6) have been reported. However, IgA nephropathy with
AITL has never been reported. We herein report the case of a Japanese man presenting with AITL and IgA nephropathy. A 79-year-old Japanese
man was admitted to our department with generalized edema, fatigue, fever, and weight gain of one week in duration. Two years prior to
admission, the patient was diagnosed with IgM-κ monoclonal gammopathy. Follow-up examinations that were performed in another hospital once
every six months showed no signs of progression. Aside from monoclonal gammopathy, the patient had a history of diabetes mellitus,
hypertension, and benign prostatic hyperplasia. The patient had no family history of renal disease, leukemia, or lymphoma. Amlodipine and
sitagliptin were prescribed and were taken on a regular basis. He did not report any recent changes in medications or their dosages, and he
experienced no other systemic symptoms. On physical examination, his blood pressure was 140/88 mmHg, his pulse rate was 100/min, his
respiratory rate was 24/min with an O2 saturation of 95% on room air, and his body temperature was 37.1°C. Generalized lymphadenopathy and
edema were detected. The results of a cardiovascular examination were normal, and auscultation revealed decreased bilateral breath sounds in
the lower lung fields. An abdominal examination was unremarkable with no obvious hepatosplenomegaly; a neurological examination was also
unremarkable. Laboratory investigations revealed normal complete blood counts and normal bilirubin levels (total bilirubin, 0.7 mg/dL);
however, he had elevated levels of transaminases (alanine transaminase, 50 IU/L; aspartate transaminase, 39 IU/L), lactate dehydrogenase
(466 IU/L), serum creatinine (1.80 mg/dL), and C-reactive protein (2.08 mg/dL). These findings were consistent with hypergammaglobulinemia
(total protein, 9.0 g/dL; albumin, 2.7 g/dL; IgG, 4,161 mg/dL; IgA, 828 mg/dL; and IgM, 525 mg/dL); serum and urine electrophoresis did not
detect any monoclonal proteins, including IgM-κ. The other findings included a positive direct Coombs' test, hypocomplementemia (complement
component 3, 39 mg/dL; complement component 4, 5 mg/dL; 50% complement hemolysis, <14 U/mL), cryoglobulinemia, antinuclear antibody
positivity, a biological false positive reaction, and elevated soluble interleukin-2 receptor (7,810 U/mL) levels. There was no evidence of
chronic viral infection (the patient was negative for hepatitis B surface antigen; hepatitis B surface, hepatitis C virus, human
immunodeficiency virus, human T-cell leukemia virus type 1, and treponema pallidum antibodies). The patient was negative for anti-neutrophil
cytoplasmic antibodies. A spot urinalysis revealed proteinuria (urine protein, 3+, 2.48 g/gCr) and microscopic hematuria (urine blood, 3+).
Urinary sediments showed 20-29 red blood cells per high-power field. Computed tomography revealed the swelling of the cervical, axillary,
upper mediastinal, abdominal, and inguinal lymph nodes. In addition, hepatosplenomegaly and thoracoabdominal fluids were observed. A
histopathological examination of inguinal lymph node and renal biopsy specimens and bone marrow aspiration was performed for further
evaluation. As shown in Fig. 1, the near-complete effacement of the normal lymph node architecture was observed; this was associated with
marked vascular proliferation and aggregates of medium-sized atypical lymphoid cells in the inguinal lymph nodes. These atypical lymphoid
cells showed clear to pale cytoplasm and had convoluted nuclei with dispersed chromatin. The immunophenotype of these cells was CD3+, CD20-,
CD5+, CD4+, and CD8-. Although the cells were negative for CD10 expression, some of these cells also expressed C-X-C motif chemokine ligand
13. CD21 immunohistochemistry highlighted the expansion of follicular dendritic cells. Epstein-Barr virus-encoded small RNA (EBER) in situ
hybridization revealed the marked infiltration of Epstein-Barr virus-positive B cells. The distribution of these EBER+ cells was consistent
with the distribution of CD20+ cells and not consistent with the distribution of CD3+ cells. Although some EBER+ and CD20+ B-cells were
medium to large in size, the majority were small. In addition, the abnormal morphology of the EBER+ and CD20+ B-cells and the architecture
of these proliferated cells did not extend the range of reactive B-cell proliferation. Although no chromosomal abnormalities were detected,
T-cell receptor rearrangement was found using Southern blotting. These findings were consistent with the diagnosis of AITL. A histological
evaluation of the bone marrow aspirate revealed the lymphoma cell involvement. Inguinal lymphoid biopsy. (a) A low power view of an inguinal
lymph node biopsy specimen [Hematoxylin and Eosin (H&E) staining, ×25]. The normal lymph node architecture is almost completely effaced and
the diffuse infiltration of lymphoid cells is observed. (b) A moderate-power view of the inguinal lymph node biopsy specimen (H&E staining,
×100). The aggregation of medium-sized atypical lymphoid cells and marked vascular proliferation can be observed. The neoplastic lymphoid
cells have a clear to pale cytoplasm and convoluted nuclei with dispersed chromatin. Immunohistochemical staining for (c) CD3 (×100), (d)
CD10 (×100), (e) CXCL13 (×100), and (f) CD21 (×50) revealed that most of the neoplastic cells showed CD3 positivity; the cells were negative
for CD10 expression but some expressed CXCL13. The CD21 immunohistochemistry highlights the expansion of follicular dendritic cells. (g) EBV
EBERin situ hybridization (×100) showing the marked infiltration of EBV-positive B cells. CD: Cluster of differentiation, CXCL: C-X-C motif
chemokine ligand, EBER: Epstein-Barr-virus-encoded small RNA, EBV: Epstein-Barr virus Renal biopsy showed malignant lymphoma invasion and an
IgA nephropathy pattern (Fig. 2). Light microscopy showed the focal infiltration of small to medium sized lymphoid cells, with convoluted
nuclei in the periglomerular and peritubular regions. The majority of these lymphoid cells demonstrated immunoreactivity to CD3+,
interspersed with some CD20+ cells. Some EBER+ cells were also detected in the interstitium. An immunofluorescence examination revealed
mesangial deposits of IgA and complement component 3. Small, dense deposits in the mesangial matrix were visualized using electron
microscopy. The diagnosis of AITL and IgA nephropathy was made based on the clinical and histopathological findings and the results of the
laboratory examinations. Before the diagnosis, the patient was initially treated with prednisolone (60 mg) per day. Five days later, the
patient's edema was alleviated and his urinary protein level decreased to 0.58 g/gCr, but the hematuria persisted. After the diagnosis of
AITL was made, steroid therapy was administered, followed by chemotherapy with intravenous cyclophosphamide (750 mg/m2), pirarubicin, (50
mg/m2) and vincristine (1.4 mg/m2); oral prednisolone (60 mg per day) was administered from days 1 to 5; the duration of one treatment cycle
was 21 days. Following the completion of six chemotherapy courses, the patient's symptoms gradually improved, and the generalized
lymphadenopathy and edema were alleviated. Following the completion of chemotherapy, the patient's immunoglobulin and serum creatinine
levels, proteinuria, and hematuria normalized. Repeated computed tomography examinations showed that the lymphadenopathy and other abnormal
findings were resolved. This patient was considered to have achieved complete remission; no subsequent recurrences of lymphadenopathy or
edema have been observed. Renal biopsy. (a) Light microscopy, focal infiltration by small to medium-sized atypical lymphoid cells can be
seen in periglomerular and peritubular regions (Hematoxylin and Eosin staining, ×40). (b and c) An immunofluorescence examination showing
mesangial deposits of (b) IgA (×40) and (c) C3 (×40). (d) An electron microscopic image (×3,000) showing a small amount of dense deposits in
the mesangial matrix. C3: complement component 3, IgA: immunoglobulin A We described the case of a patient with AITL with concomitant IgA
nephropathy. We propose that these two diseases could be pathologically associated from two points of view. First, the serum IgA in AITL
patients can be pathogenic and may cause extranodal involvement. The phenomenon of excessive serum IgA production in AITL patients has also
been reported and is believed to result from the excessive differentiation of IgA-plasmablasts, which is induced by transforming growth
factor-β1 and interleukin-21, which are released by neoplastic T follicular helper cells (7). Furthermore, elevated serum IgA levels have
been shown to be a novel prognostic factor in patients with AITL, although the underlying mechanism remains to be clarified (8,9). With
respect to the direct pathological contribution of IgA in AITL patients, several IgA-related extranodal diseases have been reported to be
associated with AITL. These include IgA-related leukocytoclastic vasculitis (10,11), atypical linear IgA dermatosis (12), and IgA pemphigus
(13). These findings suggest that AITL patients may produce pathogenic IgA, which may result in extranodal diseases, including nephropathy.
Second, there was chronological coincidence in the duration of the urinary abnormalities and the systemic lymphadenopathy in the present
case. This patient's microscopic hematuria, proteinuria, and lymphadenopathy were observed at the same time, and these abnormalities
gradually diminished with the repeated chemotherapy. We therefore assumed that the patient's IgA nephropathy was associated with AITL. It is
possible that the patient had idiopathic IgA nephropathy because the high circulating levels of IgA alone could not have caused the disease
in the majority of these patients. Elevated circulating levels of IgA have, however, been reported in some patients with IgA nephropathy
(14). Furthermore, we did not have any direct evidence of the relationship between the IgA deposits in the mesangium and circulating IgA.
However, since mesangial IgA is probably derived from a circulating pool of pathogenic IgA (15), and since the polyclonal immune activation
observed in many multisystemic autoimmune diseases like AITL could cause IgA nephropathy (14), we could not deny the association between IgA
nephropathy and AITL. The further understanding of this relationship requires an investigation to determine the precise pathological
mechanisms underlying the tissue damage that is caused by serum IgA in AITL patients. The direct invasion of the kidney, in association with
AITL, also seemed to be a possible cause of the microscopic hematuria, proteinuria, and renal failure that were observed in the present
case; however, the pathological findings of the kidney biopsy in differed from those of a previously reported case of AITL with direct
kidney invasion (16). Moreover, kidney enlargement, which is frequently seen in cases with the massive infiltration of lymphoid cells into
the renal parenchyma (17,18), was not observed in our patient. We therefore believe that IgA nephropathy was the main disease in our
patient. The severity of IgA-related extranodal disease in patients with AITL may be a useful marker for evaluating the efficacy of
chemotherapy. In fact, the grade of microscopic hematuria gradually decreased and finally disappeared after the completion of six courses of
chemotherapy, which was paralleled by a reduction in tumor volume. Other cases of extranodal disease associated with IgA in AITL have also
shown a gradual response to chemotherapy (10-13). Furthermore, the reappearance of purpura was observed along with the recurrence of AITL in
a case of IgA-associated leukocytoclastic vasculitis in AITL (10). Considering the simplicity of the evaluation methods for patients with
reported extranodal disease, such as screening for microscopic hematuria or skin lesions, the recognition of IgA-related extranodal disease
in patients with AITL seems to be important in the follow-up of AITL. In conclusion, AITL can be associated with IgA nephropathy. As several
IgA-related extranodal diseases seem to be useful markers of the severity of AITL, clinicians should assess IgA-related lesions in patients
with AITL.
