We present a rare case of newly diagnosed Evans syndrome associated with lung papillary adenocarcinoma in which the patient showed prompt
restoration of blood cell count and long‐lasting complete remission of Evans syndrome after lung cancer resection. Detailed investigation
led to a diagnosis of Evans syndrome. In the first year of the disease, left lower lung papillary adenocarcinoma was diagnosed. Pulmonary
lobectomy and three courses of chemotherapy were performed. Six months after the initial visit, the primary lung cancer and the autoimmune
diseases appeared to be well controlled. We hypothesized that our patient's initial presentation of hematological manifestation was a
paraneoplastic phenomenon associated to her underlying malignancy. This rare case report illustrates the unique relationship between primary
lung cancer and the development of paraneoplastic Evans syndrome. Paraneoplastic syndromes (PNS) are defined as tumor‐associated indirect
systemic effects. Cancer patients, especially those in late stage, may display various hematological manifestations, but Evans syndrome is a
rare PNS in malignant solid tumors. We present a rare case of newly diagnosed secondary Evans syndrome associated with pulmonary papillary
carcinoma in which the patient showed prompt restoration of peripheral blood cell count and long‐lasting complete remission of Evans
syndrome after lung cancer resection and chemotherapy. A 39‐year‐old non‐smoking woman presented to the Tianjin Medical University General
Hospital on 10 May 2013 with palpitation and fatigue that had persisted for a year, and cough and expectoration that had persisted for
two months. On admission, the patient exhibited a mild degree of pallor; however, no other abnormality was observed. The results of
peripheral blood cell count were as follows: red blood cell 1.87 × 1012/L, hemoglobin 65 g/L, reticulocyte 5.6%, white blood cell
4.43 × 109/L, 60% neutrophils, 27% lymphocytes, and platelet 35 × 109/L. The D‐dimer level was 1128 ng/mL. Vitamin B12, folic acid, and
ferritin levels were normal. Further liver chemistry studies showed elevated levels of aspartate aminotransferase 89 U/L,
γ‐glutamyltransferase 87 U/L, lactate dehydrogenase 321 U/L, total bilirubin 23.5 μmol/L, and indirect bilirubin 16.6 μmol/L. Urine routine
and renal function tests were negative. The CD55 and CD59 levels in blood cells indicated normal. No abnormality was found during congenital
hemolysis tests. A direct Coombs’ test for immunoglobulin G was positive. Cold agglutinins and cryoglobulins were not detected in the serum.
The patient was serologically negative for other immunologic autoantibodies. Bone marrow aspiration was indicated, with an increased ratio
of erythroid series and increased megakaryocytes, and a biopsy of the bone marrow from the iliac bone had a normal appearance on pathologic
examination (Fig 1). Results from chromosome testing were normal, at 46 XX. Based on the laboratory findings, the patient was diagnosed with
Evans syndrome. Microscopic view of the bone marrow biopsy specimen. Pathologic diagnosis showed hyperplasia of granulocyte series,
erythroid series, and megakaryocytes (hematoxylin‐eosin ×10). A chest computed tomography (CT) scan on admission showed a 3.0 × 2.6 cm2 mass
in the lower lobe of the left lung, with no mediastinal or intrapulmonary lymphadenopathy (Fig 2a). Tumor markers were subsequently detected
and all returned negative. A bronchoscopy revealed secretions throughout the airways with no visible masses. Bronchopulmonary lavage was
negative for any infectious or malignant process. After two weeks of antibacterial and antifungal therapy, the chest CT indicated no
improvement. After consulting the chest surgery department, CT‐guided percutaneous lung biopsy was performed. Histopathologic examination of
the biopsy specimen showed pulmonary adenocarcinoma. Single‐photon emission bone and cranium CT scans demonstrated no lesions. Chest
computed tomography reveals (a) a 3.0 × 2.6 cm2 soft tissue density shadow in the lower lobe parenchyma of the left lung field, and (b) the
lower lobe of the left lung resection. As a result of these findings, a diagnosis of lung cancer with Evans syndrome was made. The patient
was treated with intravenous gamma globulin combined with component blood transfusion therapy. She safely underwent a left lower pulmonary
lobectomy and systemic lymphadenectomy. Histological subtyping was papillary predominant invasive adenocarcinoma (Fig 3). In the subsequent
months, she underwent adjuvant chemotherapy with one cycle of gemcitabine/cisplatin and two cycles of docetaxel/nedaplatin. One month after
the completion of chemotherapy, the peripheral blood cell count increased to normal and reticulocyte, bilirubin, and lactate dehydrogenase
levels all returned to normal range. The patient was followed‐up every three months for 10 months after the surgery, and chest CT (Fig 2b),
cranial magnetic resonance imaging, and skeleton emission CT indicated no relapse or metastasis. The blood cell count and hemolysis index
were normal. Microscopic view of the lung biopsy specimen. Pathologic diagnosis showed pulmonary adenocarcinoma (hematoxylin‐eosin ×10).
Paraneoplastic syndromes are defined as tumor‐associated indirect systemic effects. Given their rarity, it is difficult to determine
prevalence; however, one study estimated PNS prevalence of up to 8% in cancer patients.1 Primary bronchogenic carcinoma is one of the most
common malignant tumors. PNS occur in approximately 10% of patients with lung cancer.2 Adenocarcinoma is the most common histologic subtype
of lung cancer in most countries, accounting for almost half of all lung cancers.3 The patient in our case was a middle‐aged, non‐smoking
woman with a family history of lung cancer. Devarakonda et al. reported that nearly 10% of all lung cancers worldwide are diagnosed in
people who have never smoked.4 Lung cancer in this group is more frequent in women and is almost always associated with lung adenocarcinoma
histology.4 The most common PNS of solid tumors involves nervous system dysfunction. Hematologic autoimmune disease, such as autoimmune
hemolytic anemia (AIHA) and immune thrombocytopenia (ITP), are the most common PNS of lymphoid neoplasms; however, secondary Evans syndrome
is a much rarer PNS in malignant solid tumors.5, 6, 7, 8, 9 Puthenparambil et al. reported that out of 52 cases, nine cases of
paraneoplastic AIHA were caused by lung cancer.10 All nine cases were non‐small cell lung cancer; in solid cancers, about two‐thirds of the
antibodies were warm and one‐third were cold.10 Krauth et al. identified 15 cases of paraneoplastic ITP caused by lung cancer in 68 solid
cancer cases, and four of the 15 cases were adenocarcinoma.11 Cancer patients, especially those in late stage, may display various
hematological manifestations, such as cytopenia and coagulation dysfunction. The mechanisms of the syndrome include hematopoietic raw
material deficiency, marrow infiltration of tumor cells, anemia of chronic disease, microangiopathic hemolytic anemia, bone marrow fibrosis,
and chemotherapy or radiation‐induced bone marrow suppression. Some PNS may be attributed to remote effects of the tumor, such as an ectopic
production of bioactive humoral factors (hormones, cytokines) by tumor cells or immune cross‐reactivity by effector cells of antitumor
immune response between tumor and normal host tissues.12 The mechanisms by which cancers induce autoimmunity are broken down into the
following categories: disruption of central tolerance, peripheral immune dysregulation, and alteration of self‐antigens.13 In a case report
describing a patient with PNS‐AIHA, antibodies had formed against the tumor antigens and cross‐reacted with the erythrocyte antigen: band
3.14 The paraneoplastic autoimmune process may affect the nervous system, cutaneous tissue, musculoskeletal system, hematopoietic cells,
endocrine system or kidneys.15, 16 Immune‐mediated hematological PNS include AIHA, anti‐FVIII antibodies, antiphospholipid antibodies,
autoimmune thrombocytopenia, and others.17, 18 Hematological manifestations may occur prior to or concurrent with cancer, or well after the
end of treatment, as a sign of recurrence or during complete remission of the cancer.19, 20 The diagnosis and treatment of PNS is a very
challenging issue. An important characteristic of tumor‐related PNS is the influence of anti‐tumor therapy on symptoms. Partial or complete
responses to chemotherapy or radiotherapy have been observed. The therapeutic regimen of paraneoplastic Evans syndrome is focused on
treating the tumor, which is the protopathy, while the Evans syndrome, which occurs prior to the tumor, is mainly treated with
glucocorticoid and intravenous gamma globulin. In general, patients with hematologic syndromes have been reported to have a poor prognosis.2
Hematological PNS in solid tumors have received little attention, thus there are many unanswered questions. We believe that careful
laboratory studies in patients with PNS may provide interesting insights into the biology of malignant tumors – in particular, the
interaction of the tumor with the immune system – and may provide some clues to indicate immune therapy of solid cancers. In conclusion, we
present a rare case of newly diagnosed secondary Evans syndrome associated with pulmonary papillary carcinoma in which the patient showed
prompt restoration of peripheral blood cell count and long‐lasting complete remission of Evans syndrome after lung cancer resection. While
some patients attend hospital because of hematological symptoms, such as cytopenia and coagulation dysfunction, the possibility of
extramedullary tumors should be considered. Hematology and oncology practitioners should have an increased awareness of PNS so that they can
take prompt and proper courses of action for the earlier recognition and diagnosis of malignancies, potentially leading to more positive
outcomes for patients. The authors thank proofreaders and editors for assistance in the preparation of the manuscript. No authors report any
conflict of interest.
