Correspondence to Dr.　Yuji Tanaka, yutanaka-gif@umin.net We herein report the case of a 72-year-old-man with pulmonary cryptococcoma along
with cryptococcal meningitis who underwent surgery for pulmonary lesions while receiving chemotherapy. We noted two major clinical issues.
First, the presence of pulmonary cryptococcoma had a detrimental influence on the cryptococcal meningitis. Second, resolution of the
pulmonary cryptococcoma through antifungal therapy had a beneficial influence on the recovery from cryptococcal meningitis. As observed in
the current case with pulmonary and meningeal cryptococcosis, surgery for pulmonary cryptococcoma with continuous antifungal treatment
should be considered for cases where the symptoms respond poorly to antifungal therapy and radiographic abnormalities persist.
Cryptococcosis is a global invasive mycosis associated with significant morbidity and mortality (1). The 2010 Infectious Diseases Society of
America guidelines described the protocol for the management of cryptococcosis (1). However, the management of pulmonary cryptococcosis in
the presence of cryptococcal meningitis has not been described. Several reports published years ago described surgical resection of
pulmonary cryptococcoma in the presence of cryptococcal meningitis (2,3), but no recent case reports or large-scale studies have been
published. We herein report a case of surgical resection and chemotherapy of pulmonary cryptococcoma in an elderly patient with cryptococcal
meningitis. A 72-year-old man with an old infarction of the left caudate nucleus and putamen developed a slight fever. After 1 month, he
experienced headaches; subsequently, his level of consciousness declined, and he was admitted to our hospital. He had no history of
immunodeficiency diseases or diabetes mellitus, and he had never gone abroad. As he was engaged in a profession related to forestry, he
often visited mountainous regions but did not breed any animals. A neurological examination indicated a reduced consciousness (Glasgow coma
scale; E4 V4 M5), meningeal irritation, hyperreflexia of all four extremities, and a positive Babinski response. A blood examination
revealed normal levels of tumor markers, negative results for human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) antibody testing, increased β-D glucan
levels (54.5 pg/mL; reference range, <20.0 pg/mL), and positive results for cryptococcus antigen testing. A cerebrospinal fluid (CSF)
examination indicated a cell count of 9/μL (all lymphocytes); furthermore, the CSF protein level was 535 mg/dL (reference range, 10-40
mg/dL), and the CSF glucose level was 4 mg/dL (reference range, 50-75 mg/dL). An India ink smear of the CSF yielded a positive result, and
cryptococcus antigen (glucuronoxylomannan) was detected. A mycological culture of the CSF indicated the presence of Cryptococcus neoformans.
Brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed an old infarction of the left caudate nucleus and putamen but no abnormal enhancement
(Figure A). Chest radiography and computed tomography (CT) revealed a solitary mass shadow in the right lower lung (Figure B). Bronchoscopy
indicated pulmonary cryptococcoma. Based on these findings, the patient was diagnosed with cryptococcal meningitis along with pulmonary
cryptococcoma. The imaging findings for the present case. (A) Brain magnetic resonance imaging (T1-weighted image and T2-weighted image)
showed an old infarction of the left caudate nucleus and left putamen but no abnormal enhancement. (B) Chest radiography and computed
tomography revealed a solitary mass shadow in the right lower lung. (C) Clinical course. BT: body temperature, CSF: cerebrospinal fluid As
amphotericin B and flucytosine could not be administered due to their side effects, fluconazole (400 mg/day) was given instead. Despite the
use of antifungal therapy for 3 months, the patient's symptoms persisisted, including his fever and disturbance of consciousness, and the
CSF examination results worsened (Figure C). Because antifungal therapy for 3 months could not improve the radiographic abnormality of the
pulmonary granuloma, the possibility that the pulmonary granuloma might be a malignant lesion remained. Therefore, surgery was considered
and performed for the pulmonary granuloma. Histological and mycological examinations revealed the presence of C. neoformans in specimens
removed during surgery. Thereafter, antifungal therapy (fluconazole) for 6 months improved his symptoms and the CSF examination results.
Brain MRI continued to show an old infarction, but no other abnormal findings were noted. We noted two major clinical issues. First, the
presence of pulmonary cryptococcoma had a detrimental influence on the cryptococcal meningitis. Second, the resolution of the pulmonary
cryptococcoma through antifungal therapy had a beneficial influence on the recovery from cryptococcal meningitis. The 2010 Infectious
Diseases Society of America guidelines described the management protocol for cryptococcosis, with specific regimens recommended for three
high-risk groups: HIV-infected individuals, organ transplant recipients, and non-HIV-infected and non-transplant individuals (1). In non-
HIV-infected and non-transplant individuals, the treatment strategy for cryptococcal meningitis includes antifungal therapy, primarily with
amphotericin B and flucytosine (1). Furthermore, among non-immunosuppressed patients with pulmonary and non-meningeal cryptococcosis,
antifungal therapy should be initially administered, and surgery should be considered for cases with persistent radiographic abnormalities
and symptoms that are unresponsive to antifungal therapy (1). For patients with isolated pulmonary cryptococcosis, surgery has two major
roles (2-5). The first is to rule out malignancy by surgical excision of the pulmonary nodule (1). The second role concerns patients with
persistent focal radiographic abnormalities despite conventional antifungal therapy; in this population with persistent symptoms or signs,
some authorities have suggested surgical resection rather than continuing long-term antifungal therapy (1). However, the management of
pulmonary cryptococcoma with cryptococcal meningitis has not yet been described. Several reports published years ago described the surgical
resection of pulmonary cryptococcoma in the presence of cryptococcal meningitis. One case report describes the successful treatment of two
patients with co-existing pulmonary and meningeal cryptococcosis with pulmonary resection and chemotherapy (6). Another report describes a
patient with combined pulmonary and neural cryptococcosis who was successfully managed with pulmonary resection and chemotherapy (7). Both
cases have progressed favorably since the operation. Surgery for pulmonary granuloma may be effective as a radical cure for the pulmonary
lesion as well as for preventing further dissemination to the brain. Although no similar cases have been reported recently, surgery for such
cases may be a therapeutic option. In the present case, the persistent radiographic abnormalities under chemotherapy suggested the
possibility that the pulmonary granuloma might be a malignant lesion; therefore, surgery was performed. Although no clear standard has been
established of surgical indications for pulmonary cryptococcoma in cases with cryptococcal meningitis, as in the present case, surgery for
the pulmonary granuloma along with continuous antifungal treatment should be considered for patients with persistent radiographic
abnormalities.
