Correspondence to Dr.　Shinichi Nishi, snishi@med.kobe-u.ac.jp Antineutrophil cytoplasmic autoantibody (ANCA)-associated vasculitis is a
life-threatening disease characterized by rapidly progressive glomerulonephritis (RPGN) and diffuse alveolar hemorrhage (DAH).
Glucocorticoids and immunosuppressants are commonly used to treat this disease but may induce irreversible side effects, particularly in
elderly patients. We herein report the case of a 76-year-old woman with RPGN. After methylprednisolone pulse therapy, DAH occurred, and she
required ventilatory support. After plasma exchange, her serum creatinine level improved, and she was discharged with home oxygen therapy.
Immunosuppressive agents other than glucocorticoids were not required. In conclusion, plasma exchange with glucocorticoid therapy may be
effective in treating severe ANCA-associated vasculitis in elderly patients. Antineutrophil cytoplasmic autoantibody (ANCA)-associated
vasculitis (AAV) is a systemic vasculitis that predominantly affects the elderly (1,2). For the primary induction of remission, AAV is
generally treated with glucocorticoids, cyclophosphamide, or rituximab, a newly available therapy (3,4). As initial therapy, the Japanese
Society of Nephrology also recommends daily treatment with oral cyclophosphamide (25-100 mg/day) or intravenous pulses of cyclophosphamide
(250-750 mg/m2) with corticosteroids (5). Initial therapy with corticosteroids alone is indicated for cases in which aggressive treatment is
required; however, the use of immunosuppressive agents is not desirable, particularly in patients older than 70 years. Diffuse alveolar
hemorrhage (DAH) is well known as a serious AAV symptom associated with high mortality (6,7). In a study of 107 patients with biopsy-proven
ANCA-associated microscopic polyangiitis and glomerulonephritis, the relative risk of death was 8.65 times higher in patients with pulmonary
hemorrhage than in those without (7). However, the adverse effects of this therapy cannot be overlooked, and glucocorticoids and
immunosuppressive agents may increase the susceptibility to infection, which is a strong indicator of mortality in patients with AAV (8).
Plasma exchange is a promising option for the treatment of AAV and is recommended in the guidelines (3,5,9). Because ANCA causes necrotizing
glomerulonephritis and small vessel vasculitis, the removal of ANCA may contribute to the control of disease activity and the prevention of
organ damage. Although the guidelines recommend the addition of plasma exchange to corticosteroid and cyclophosphamide therapy in patients
with advanced kidney dysfunction, whether or not plasma exchange is effective in patients with alveolar hemorrhage is unclear (10). We
herein present the case of a 76-year-old woman with severe AAV and DAH who successfully achieved remission following prompt initiation of
plasma exchange and low-dose prednisolone. A 76-year-old woman was admitted to our hospital with shortness of breath. One year before
admission, she had presented with a three-month history of dry cough and was admitted to a local hospital for an examination. Chest-X ray
showed ground glass opacity, and respiratory function testing showed an obstructive pattern. Macrophages were observed in the
bronchoalveolar lavage fluid. She was diagnosed with idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis and discharged with home oxygen therapy only when she
experienced shortness of breath. At the time, her serum creatinine level was 0.56 mg/dL, and there were no abnormalities on urinalysis.
Three months before admission, she was again admitted to the local hospital for shortness of breath, anorexia, and weight loss (15 kg over 3
months), and her serum creatinine level was elevated to 2.23 mg/dL. In addition, urinary protein, hematuria (20-29 per high-power field),
and markedly elevated myeloperoxidase (MPO)-ANCA were detected. She was transferred to our hospital for further examination and treatment of
suspected MPO-ANCA-associated glomerulonephritis. On admission, a physical examination revealed fine crackles, pale conjunctivae, clubbed
fingers, body weight of 62.0 kg, body temperature of 36.7℃, blood pressure of 132/60 mmHg, pulse rate of 80 beats/min, percutaneous oxygen
saturation of <90% on atmospheric air with a respiratory rate of 12-16 breath/min, and her Birmingham Vasculitis Activity Score was 24. As
shown in Table, the serum creatinine level was 2.35 mg/dL, and the MPO-ANCA titer was 336 U/mL (normal range, 0-3.5 U/mL); normocytic anemia
was detected. Laboratory Findings on Admission. MCV: mean corpuscular volume, MCH: mean corpuscular hemoglobin, MCHC: mean corpuscular
hemoglobin concentration, eGFR: estimated glomerular filtration rate, TIBC: total iron binding capacity, APTT: activated partial
thromboplastin time, PT: prothrombin time, PR3: proteinase-3, MPO: myeloperoxidase, ANCA: antineutrophil cytoplasmic autoantibody, GBM:
glomerular basement membrane, RBC: red blood cell, UPCR: urinary protein to creatinine ratio On the day following admission, percutaneous
renal biopsy was performed (Fig. 1). The histopathological findings revealed cellular crescents in 5 out of 10 glomeruli. No glomeruli
showed mesangial proliferation or basement membrane changes. Tubulitis was found in the interstitial tissue and fibrinoid necrosis in the
interlobular artery. Immunofluorescence studies did not reveal deposits in the glomeruli. These findings were compatible with ANCA-
associated glomerulonephritis. Histopathology of the kidney. The microscopic findings of the glomerulus showed cellular crescent formation
and disruption of the Bowman’s capsule (A: periodic acid-Schiff staining; original magnification, ×400). There were few changes in the
glomerular basement membrane and mesangial area. High disease activity was indicated by fibrinoid necrosis in the lobular artery (B:
Masson’s trichrome staining; original magnification, ×400). The immunofluorescence studies revealed no glomerular deposition (C: IgG, D:
IgA, E: IgM, F: C3, and G: C1q). As shown in Fig. 2, intravenous methylprednisolone pulse therapy was administered every 24 hours for 3
consecutive days; however, on the day following the pulse therapy (Day 5), the patient's respiratory condition suddenly worsened, and she
required ventilatory support. DAH was diagnosed on bronchoscopy and chest computed tomography, which showed broad infiltrative shadows and
ground glass opacity in her lungs (Fig. 3). Immediately after the diagnosis, plasma exchange was initiated for a total of 7 times for 2
weeks, with approximately 1 time the predicted plasma volume (estimated by the following formula: [0.065×body weight (kg)]×) (11) per
session, using freshly frozen plasma as the replacement solution. During this period, water-soluble prednisolone 60 mg (equivalent oral
prednisolone dose: 30 mg/day) was administered intravenously. Clinical course after admission. After admission, methylprednisolone pulse
therapy was initiated to treat rapidly progressive glomerulonephritis due to anti-nuclear cytoplasmic antibodies. However, diffuse alveolar
hemorrhaging occurred, and the respiratory condition rapidly worsened on Day 5 after admission. Plasma exchange was immediately performed
(seven times for two weeks). There was an improvement in the respiratory condition, and the patient was successfully extubated on Day 14.
Her serum creatinine level decreased from a maximum of 2.99 mg/dL to 1.48 mg/dL, and the MPO-ANCA titer also decreased to the normal range.
Chest computed tomography. Chest computed tomography on the sudden onset of dyspnea showed broad infiltrative shadows and ground glass
opacity in the lungs (left panel). Diffuse alveolar hemorrhaging and acute deterioration of interstitial pulmonary fibrosis was diagnosed.
The therapy with plasma exchange and low-dose prednisolone was dramatically effective, and these shadows were considerably attenuated after
one month (right panel). After 4 sessions of plasma exchange were performed, the FiO2 decreased from 100% to 30%, and the positive end-
expiratory pressure decreased from 10 cmH2O to 5 cmH2O. Her respiratory condition improved, and she was successfully extubated on Day 14.
The intravenous water-soluble prednisolone was discontinued, and oral prednisolone at a dose of 30 mg per day was started on Day 29. Without
using additional immunosuppressive agents, the serum creatinine level returned to 1.48 mg/dL, and the MPO-ANCA titer returned to the normal
range. After extubation, the percutaneous oxygen saturation was 100% at rest on 1-2 L of oxygen per minute; however, on exertion, the oxygen
saturation dropped to <90%, and she was discharged with home oxygen therapy. We successfully treated an elderly patient with severe AAV and
DAH via the immediate introduction of plasma exchange. Therefore, the combination of plasma exchange and low-dose glucocorticoid therapy
without additional immunosuppressive agents may be a safe and effective treatment for AAV in elderly patients. The mortality of AAV is
particularly high in cases of critical disease. Mechanical ventilation and admission to the intensive-care unit (ICU) have been reported to
be strong predictors of increased mortality within 28 days after admission (12). However, despite requiring mechanical ventilation and ICU
admission, the present patient survived. High disease activity and the need for high doses of immunosuppressive agents have also been
associated with a higher risk of death, probably due to infection and active vasculitis (13). It is difficult but critically important to
achieve an optimal balance of immunosuppression and avoid infection during the treatment of severe AAV. Although the MPO-ANCA titer had
decreased before the initiation of plasma exchange, our patient still required mechanical ventilation and ICU management for DAH. We
therefore needed to employ some form of additional therapy and selected plasma exchange. After 4 sessions of plasma exchange were performed,
the MPO-ANCA titer decreased from 188 U/mL to 26.2 U/mL. In a previous study, patients with DAH treated by ventilator support needed at
least five sessions of plasma exchange for recovery (14). We performed seven sessions of plasma exchange in total, in accordance with the
protocol of the ongoing PEXIVAS study (15). The PEXIVAS study is being conducted to clarify the effectiveness and safety of adjunct plasma
exchange and oral glucocorticoid regimens in patients with severe AAV. Patients with AAV accompanied by kidney dysfunction (eGFR <50
mL/min), necrotizing glomerulonephritis, or lung hemorrhage are included in this study and have been randomized to receive one of the
following treatment regimens: 1) plasma exchange and either standard or low-dose glucocorticoids or 2) no plasma exchange and either
standard or low-dose glucocorticoids. Although the study is still ongoing, Klemmer et al. reported that DAH accompanied by AAV resolved
during plasmapheresis in all 20 patients evaluated (14). According to a previous study (9), 137 newly diagnosed AAV patients with elevated
serum creatinine levels were randomly assigned to receive 7 sessions of plasma exchange or 3,000 mg of intravenous methylprednisolone (both
groups received oral cyclophosphamide and prednisolone). Most deaths occurred during the first three months, when steroid dosages were the
highest and vasculitis was the most active. At three months, however, plasma exchange was associated with a reduction in risk of death and
progression to end-stage kidney disease compared with methylprednisolone. Based on these results, we performed combined therapy of 7 plasma
exchanges over 2 weeks and methylprednisolone pulse therapy, followed by low-dose prednisolone (0.5 mg/kg/day) in the present study.
Although AAV is commonly treated with oral prednisolone (1 mg/kg/day) in combination with other immunosuppressants, low-dose prednisolone
alone was prescribed because of our patient's age and the preceding lung injury. As a result, the disease was controlled with plasma
exchange and low-dose prednisolone only, and we succeeded in reducing the risk of treatment-related toxicity, such as infection. In
conclusion, our present findings suggest that the treatment protocol of seven plasma exchanges for two weeks and low-dose prednisolone may
be an effective and safe means of inducing the remission of severe AAV in elderly patients. This study was supported in part by a Grant-in-
Aid for Intractable Renal Diseases Research, Research on Rare and Intractable Diseases, and Health and Labour Sciences Research Grants from
the Ministry of Health, Labour and Welfare of Japan and in part by a Grant-in-Aid for Research on Ideal Treatment Methods for the Prevention
of Progression of Chronic Kidney Disease, Practical Research for Kidney Diseases, and Health and Labour Sciences Research Grants from the
Ministry of Health, Labour and Welfare of Japan.
