The unique clinical manifestations of congenital partial lipodystrophy are herein reported due to its rarity. Lipodystrophy syndrome is a
clinically variable and causally heterogeneous disorder1, 2. A 33‐year‐old Japanese woman presented with ‘sporadic’ congenital partial
lipodystrophy (CPLD) associated with mandibuloacral dysplasia (MAD) and an unusual fat maldistribution (Figure 1a–d). She had many unique
features, such as growth retardation without cognitive dysfunction, bilateral sensorineural deafness and alopecia (Figure 1f,g), which
coexisted with various progeroid features distinct from those previously described in classical CPLD and/or MAD–A/B types1, 2, 3, thus
suggesting a novel subtype of CPLD or a new causative syndrome. (a) Anterior and lateral views of the patient show a generalized absence of
subcutaneous fat with a protuberant abdomen, small mandible, small mouth and beaked nose. (b) Close up view of the face and axillary
regions. Note the presence of facial lipoatrophy, a lack of hair and the existence of acanthosis nigricans. (c) Multiple calluses are
observed in the soles of her feet. (d) A cross‐sectional computed tomography scan at the navel level and thighs. Note the lack of
subcutaneous fat and an excessive amount of visceral fat accumulation. (e) T1 weighted magnetic resonance imaging of the sagittal section of
the head and upper thorax. Note the presence of subcutaneous adipose tissue in the dorsal cervical region with mandibular hypoplasia. (f)
Growth chart. (g) Alopecia areata. She was born at full‐term gestation. Her parents first noted fat loss in her limbs during infancy, and
she subsequently developed poor overall growth (Figure 1f). Deafness was detected at prepuberty. At 10 years‐of‐age, an extensive
endocrinological investigation including growth hormones, insulin‐like growth factor‐1 levels, thyroid and adrenal functions, and head
computed tomography showed no abnormalities. At 14 years‐of‐age, she was admitted for leg muscle cramps on several occasions. Subcutaneous
fat loss was noted predominantly in the face and extremities. An oral glucose tolerance test (1.7‐g glucose/kg) showed normal glucose
tolerance (Japan Diabetes Society criteria, 2012) with hyperinsulinemia (homeostasis model assessment of insulin resistance 5.3) and
elevated hepatic enzyme levels. At 21 years‐of‐age, dyslipidemia, steatohepatitis on a biopsy and impaired glucose tolerance (glycated
hemoglobin 5.7%; National Glycohemoglobin Standardization Program) with marked hyperinsulinemia were noted. A tentative diagnosis of CPLD
(Dunnigan–Köbberling variety) was made1, 2. When the patient was 33 years‐of‐age, further investigations were carried out (body mass index
15.1 kg/m2) and progressively abnormal adipose tissue topography with a paucity of subcutaneous fat in her entire body including the palms
of her hands and soles of her feet was noted (Figure 1a–c). Abdominal computed tomography and whole body magnetic resonance images confirmed
visceral fat accumulation (visceral fat area/subcutaneous fat area = 217.1/13.3 cm2 at the navel level) with mandibular hypoplasia without
clavicular hypoplasia (Figure 1d,e). She showed hirsutism, acanthosis nigricans, alopecia areata (Figure 1b,g) and dysmenorrhea (due to
polycystic ovary syndrome based on the low sex hormone‐binding globulin, normal free testosterone, elevated luteinizing
hormone/follicle‐stimulating hormone ratio and a polycystic pattern on magnetic resonance imaging [T1, T2WI/fat suppression imaging]). Low
plasma leptin/adiponectin levels were observed (3.6 ng/mL and 2.4 μg/mL, respectively). An oral glucose tolerance test revealed a diabetic
pattern (fasting plasma glucose 103, 2 h 230 mg/dL) with hyperinsulinemia (fasting immunoreactive insulin 23.8, 2 h 226.9 μU/mL), and severe
insulin resistance was confirmed by the glucose clamp technique (glucose infusion rate 4.32 mg/kg/min at an infusion rate of 1.5 mU/kg/min;
healthy control 10.9 ± 4.2). A sequence analysis was carried out to establish genetic causes; however, no key mutations for CPLD or MAD
(LMNA gene encoding lamin A and C, peroxisome proliferator‐activated receptor gamma, perilipin, cell death‐inducing fiffa‐like effector C,
zinc metalloprotein STE24 and PTRF gene encoding cavin‐1)1, 2 were identified. Potential causative factors included the regional differences
in fat deposition as a result of the variable expression of unknown genetic mutations, and the severity of insulin resistance, potentially
leading to various metabolic derangements. Recently, seven atypical MAD cases with lipodistrophy were reported by Shastry et al.4; two
female patients shared some phenotypic similarities with our case, including deafness, a short stature and mandible hypoplasia of unknown
genetic origin. The other five patients were males with hypogonadism. This is the first such report in Asia, including Japan. The unique
clinical manifestations of this case are herein reported because of its rarity. The authors declare no conflict of interest.
