A 72-year-old man with ulcerative colitis (UC) presented with complete left abducens nerve palsy. Although MRI showed no significant
changes, cerebrospinal fluid analysis revealed pleocytosis and elevated protein and interleukin (IL)-6 levels. His serum proteinase
3-antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody (PR3-ANCA) level was also elevated to 31.1 U/mL, but granulomatosis with polyangiitis was not
observed. On the basis of the diagnosis of autoimmune cranial neuropathy, he was treated with steroid therapy. While tapering steroid
therapy, his serum PR3-ANCA levels; cerebrospinal fluid findings, including IL-6 levels; and symptoms improved. Serum PR3-ANCA could be a
useful parameter of neurological disorders associated with ANCA-positive UC. The association of ulcerative colitis (UC) with antineutrophil
cytoplasmic antibodies (ANCAs) has been studied. ANCA testing is helpful in distinguishing UC from Crohn's disease.1 2 Although UC-
associated ANCAs do not have the potential for development of systemic vasculitis or for neutrophil activation,3 the pathogenic role of
ANCAs in inflammatory bowel diseases remains unknown. It is also unknown whether the ANCA level shows simultaneous changes with UC disease
activity. We describe a case of unilateral abducens nerve palsy associated with proteinase 3 (PR3)-ANCA-positive UC, where serum PR3-ANCA
levels and neurological symptoms improved simultaneously during the course of tapering steroid therapy. A 72-year-old man with a 5-year
history of UC was referred to our hospital reporting double vision that had started 40 days previously. Since his UC symptoms were
unresponsive to steroid therapy, he was treated with vedolizumab and his UC was stable on admission to our hospital. Clinical examination
revealed complete left abducens nerve palsy, with no evidence of uveitis and a normal fundus. No other abnormal neurological findings were
detected. His temperature was normal. His C reactive protein (2.2 mg/dL) and PR3-ANCA (31.1 U/mL; ELISA) levels were elevated. Cerebrospinal
fluid (CSF) analysis revealed pleocytosis (25/mm3), elevated protein (127 mg/dL) and interleukin (IL)-6 (437 pg/mL) levels, and normal
glucose and intracranial pressure levels. Results of extensive microbiological and immunological studies were normal. Antibodies and
antigens for HIV were negative. CT of the chest, abdomen and pelvis were unremarkable, except for findings of UC. Brain MRI showed a swollen
nasal cavity mucosal membrane and no significant change in the left abducens nerve and around it (figure 1). Magnetic resonance angiography
showed no stenotic lesions. Nasal cavity mucosal membrane biopsy showed no specific changes and no evidence of granuloma. There was no
evidence of granulomatosis with polyangiitis, and the lungs and kidneys were normal. (A) T2-weighted axial (1.5 T; TR, 3160 ms; TE,
183.3 ms) images show no significant changes in the left abducens nerve or around it. (B) T2-weighted axial (1.5 T; TR, 4025 ms; TE,
88.4 ms) images showed a swollen nasal cavity mucosal membrane (arrow). On the basis of diagnosis of autoimmune cranial mononeuritis of the
abducens nerve, high-dose methylprednisolone (1000 mg/day) steroid therapy was initiated intravenously and continued for 3 days (figure 2).
The left abducens nerve palsy partially improved; therefore, another course of high-dose methylprednisolone steroid therapy was continued
followed by oral prednisolone (20 mg/day) steroid therapy. Two courses of high-dose methylprednisolone (1000 mg/day for 3 days) were
initiated intravenously followed by oral prednisolone (20 mg/day). After the steroid therapy was started, the left abducens nerve palsy and
CSF findings improved. During the course of tapering steroid therapy, serum PR3-ANCA and CSF IL-6 levels decreased. Four months after
symptom onset, the left abducens nerve palsy was completely resolved with treatment of oral prednisolone (10 mg/day). CSF, cerebrospinal
fluid; mPSL, methylprednisolone; PSL, prednisolone. Two months from its onset, the left abducens nerve palsy along with CSF findings had
improved. During the course of tapering steroid therapy, serum PR3-ANCA and CSF IL-6 (1.2 pg/mL) levels decreased. Four months after the
onset, the left abducens nerve palsy had completely resolved with the treatment of oral prednisolone (10 mg/day). We report a case of
unilateral abducens nerve palsy associated with PR3-ANCA-positive UC caused by autoimmune mechanisms. Neurological disorders associated with
UC are uncommon, although other extraintestinal manifestations have been described. Neurological disorders have been reported in 3% of cases
with inflammatory bowel disease,4 and only a few cases of cranial neuropathy associated with UC have been reported (table 1).5–9 Some cases
of olfactory dysfunction, optic neuritis and sensorineural hearing loss have been reported. Case reports of cranial nerve disorder
associated with UC Autoimmune Anti-TNF therapy associated Steroid Steroid TNF, tumour necrosis factor; UC, ulcerative colitis. Biological
therapies may cause neurological complications. Central nervous system vasculitis secondary to anti-tumour necrosis factor therapy has been
reported, including other diseases.4 The safety of vedolizumab with respect to neurological complications for UC has been evaluated.10 Our
patient developed abducens nerve palsy 10 months after initiating vedolizumab therapy. His neurological symptoms improved with steroid
therapy without cessation of the vedolizumab, but the possibility of an association with vedolizumab in the present case cannot be excluded.
Pathophysiologically, three major mechanisms are reported to cause neurological disorders associated with UC: (i) cerebrovascular disease as
a consequence of thrombosis and thromboembolism, (ii) systemic and cerebral vasculitis and (iii) probably immune-mediated neuropathy and
cerebral demyelination.11 There are no reports about CSF IL-6 levels in neurological complications associated with UC; however, simultaneous
improvement of neurological symptoms along with decreasing CSF IL-6 levels and responsiveness to steroid therapy suggests inflammatory and
autoimmune mechanisms in our patient. It is interesting that the serum PR3-ANCA level; CSF findings, including the IL-6 level; and
neurological symptoms showed simultaneous improvement during the course of tapering steroid therapy in the present case. Clinical
implications of PR3-ANCA levels in UC have not been defined. It has been suggested that the serum PR3-ANCA level could be a useful
serological diagnostic marker for UC,1 2 but it is not known whether or not the PR3-ANCA level and UC disease activity show simultaneous
changes. Neurological disorders associated with UC may occur independent of the UC activity.4 11 12 In our case, neurological symptoms
developed independent of the UC disease activity, and the serum PR3-ANCA levels and neurological symptoms showed simultaneous improvement,
indicating that the serum PR3-ANCA level may have been a useful parameter of the neurogenic complications accompanying ANCA-positive UC in
the present case. We described a case of unilateral abducens nerve palsy associated with PR3-ANCA-positive UC where serum PR3-ANCA levels
and neurological symptoms improved simultaneously during the course of tapering steroid therapy. Serum PR3-ANCA and CSF IL-6 levels appeared
to be useful parameters of neurogenic complications in this patient. More studies are needed to define the role of PR3-ANCA in UC.
Neurological disorders associated with UC are uncommon. Neurological disorders associated with UC may occur independent of the UC activity.
We describe a case of unilateral abducens nerve palsy associated with PR3-ANCA-positive UC, where serum PR3-ANCA levels and neurological
symptoms improved simultaneously during the course of tapering steroid therapy. Serum PR3-ANCA level may have been a useful parameter of the
neurogenic complications accompanying ANCA-positive UC in the present case, although the pathogenic role of PR3-ANCA in UC remains unknown.
Contributors: YK is a major contributor in writing the manuscript. DY and TU also treated the patient and interpreted the patient data. All
authors read and approved the final manuscript. Competing interests: None declared. Patient consent: Obtained. Provenance and peer review:
Not commissioned; externally peer reviewed.
