Febuxostat, a nonpurine xanthine oxidase inhibitor, is approved as the first-line urate-lowering therapy in gout patients with normal renal
function or mild to moderate renal impairment. The most common adverse effects of febuxostat are liver function test abnormalities,
diarrhea, and skin rash. However, there is insufficient data in patients with severe renal impairment and end-stage renal disease (ESRD). We
report the first case, to our knowledge, in which agranulocytosis developed after febuxostat treatment in an ESRD patient. A 67-year-old
woman with gout and ESRD received febuxostat 40 mg a day for 2.5 months. She subsequently complicated with febrile neutropenia and the
absolute neutrophil count was only 14/μL. After broad-spectrum antibiotics treatment and no more exposure to febuxostat for 17 days, her
infection and neutrophil count recovered. Bone marrow study during neutropenic period showed myeloid hypoplasia without evidence of
hematologic neoplasms. As febuxostat use may become more common in the population of advanced renal failure, clinicians should be aware of
this rare but potentially life-threatening adverse effect. Based on our experience, close monitoring hemogram and immediate discontinuation
of this medication may prevent serious consequences. Gout is the most common inflammatory arthritis, and the clinical presentation is
characterized by acute episodic flares of intense joint pain, caused by the deposition of monosodium urate crystals. Hyperuricemia is the
central risk factor for gout and the pharmacologic therapeutic goal of gout is to lower serum uric acid level below 6 mg/dL, the saturation
point for monosodium urate. In patients with chronic kidney disease (CKD), their urinary uric acid secretion is decreased, and the
prevalence of hyperuricemia is higher than those with normal renal function. On the other hand, elevated serum uric acid has been proposed
to attribute to CKD progression. For CKD patients with gout, aggressive control of serum uric acid level is crucial for renal protection and
gout therapy. Febuxostat, a nonpurine xanthine oxidase inhibitor, has been approved by United States Food and Drug Administration since 2009
for chronic management of hyperuricemia in patients with gout. When comparing with the traditional xanthine oxidase inhibitor, allopurinol,
febuxostat has shown its superiority in greater urate-lowering efficacy. The most common adverse effects of febuxostat include liver
function abnormalities, diarrhea, and skin rash. According to the American College of Rheumatology guidelines, febuxostat is recommended as
the first-line pharmacologic urate-lowering therapy approach in gout. The recommended starting dose is 40 mg once daily. In patients with
mild to moderate renal impairment (creatinine clearance, CrCl 30–89 mL/min), the starting dosage is the same as for patients with normal
renal function. Nevertheless, early clinical trials exclude patients with CrCl less than 30 mL/min. There is still insufficient experience
for febuxostat usage in patients with severe renal impairment and end-stage renal disease (ESRD), and the safety is still a concern. Here,
we report an ESRD patient developing agranulocytosis after febuxostat treatment. A 67-year-old woman was sent to emergency department
because of fever and sore throat. Her medical history included ESRD with regular hemodialysis 3 times per week for 15 years, hyperuricemia
and gout. She also had comorbidity such as dyslipidemia, hypertension, secondary hyperparathyroidism, and diabetes. The hemogram revealed a
white blood cell count (WBC) of 700/μL, with 2% neutrophils, 94% lymphocytes and 2% monocytes, hemoglobin 11.1 g/dL, and platelet count,
131,000/μL. Under the impression of febrile neutropenia and acute pharyngitis, she was admitted to our hematologic ward for further survey
and management. Broad-spectrum antibiotics with piperacillin 2 g and tazobactam 0.25 gm i.v. q8h had been administered and her infection
sign resolved gradually. Upon admission, we reviewed her oral medication: glipizide 5 mg tid, saxagliptin 2.5 mg qd, fenofibrate 600 mg qd,
aluminum hydroxide 324 mg tid, folic acid 5 mg qd, calcium carbonate 1000 mg tid, and febuxostat 40 mg qd. Besides, she also received
epoetin-beta 2000 iu i.v. tiw. Except for febuxostat, all the other drugs had been used for more than 1 year. Febuxostat was administered 2½
months before admission for inadequate serum uric acid control by allopurinol 50 mg qd. Two weeks before febuxostat exposure, routine
laboratory test revealed WBC 6000/μL and serum uric acid level 9.8 mg/dL. Febuxostat was discontinued thereafter due to the causal
relationship of agranulocytosis cannot be excluded. Besides, we also surveyed viral infection and autoimmune disorder. There were no
clinical or laboratory evidence of Epstein–Barr virus, cytomegalovirus, or human immunodeficiency virus infections; antinuclear antibody
(ANA) and antiextractable nuclear antigen (anti-ENA) were both negative. Bone marrow examination during hospitalization showed hypocellular
marrow with a marked decrease in myeloid component but no evidence of hematologic neoplasms. Chromosome analysis of bone marrow was normal
karyotype. The patient denied history of radiation or chemicals exposure. After stopping febuxostat for 17 days, her neutropenia improved
significantly (WBC 2100/μL, and neutrophil 66%), without any granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF) support. After discharge, her WBC
and differential count was completely normal during follow-up (Fig. 1). This study was approved by our institutional review board. The time
course of drug administration, total WBC count (WBC × 1000/μL) and absolute neutrophil count (ANC). Agranulocytosis is characterized by a
decrease in peripheral neutrophil count less than 500/μL and most cases in adults result from adverse effects of drugs. Except for
chemotherapy, the most well-known medication to induce agranulocytosis is antithyroid drugs. The clinical presentation is usually fever due
to infection, so-called febrile neutropenia, and upper aero-digestive tract infection is the most common infection source just as our
patient. The most important managements of drug-induced agranulocytosis are to identify the culprit drug, to withdraw this agent, and to
give broad-spectrum antibiotics for those with infection. In our case, before the initiation of febuxostat, her WBC was normal and
agranulocytosis developed 2.5 months after taking febuxostat. Other medications that the patient had taken for her underlying chronic
diseases were considered to be unlikely culprits, because she had been receiving them for several years and continued after this episode.
Besides, we excluded the possibility of viral infection and autoimmune diseases. Bone marrow examination also excluded hematologic disorder.
We stopped febuxostat immediately when we suspected the causality of this offending drug to agranulocytosis. Her neutrophil count recovered
in 17 days without other intervention such as steroids or G-CSF. Due to the safety concern, we did not rechallenge febuxostat thereafter.
Using Naranjo probability scale, we determined the occurrence of agranulocytosis related to febuxostat treatment to be probable. Febuxostat
has been approved in the USA for the chronic management of hyperuricemia in patients with gout, and in EU for the treatment of chronic
hyperuricemia in conditions where urate deposition has already occurred, and in Japan for the treatment of hyperuricemia in patients with or
without gout. The recommended starting dose range from 40 to 80 mg daily in different countries and no dose adjustment is required for those
with mild to moderate renal impairment (CrCl >30 mL/min). However, the efficacy and safety have not been fully evaluated in patients with
severe renal impairment (CrCl <30 mL/min) and ESRD, and febuxostat has not been approved in this population. In a small series of 17
hemodialysis patients with asymptomatic hyperuricemia, febuxostat 10 mg once daily has demonstrated significant urate-lowering efficacy and
no specific adverse effect was observed. Another series of 5 male cases with chronic hemodialysis, febuxostat 10 to 20 mg daily were
administered without apparent adverse effects. Regarding agranulocytosis induced by febuxostat, 2 patients with CKD have been reported. A
74-year-old woman with liver cirrhosis and CKD stage 3 was treated with febuxostat 10 mg per day for hyperuricemia during hospitalization.
Eleven days after febuxostat administration, she developed neutropenia with absolute neutrophil count only 600/μL. Another 68-year-old man
with CKD stage 5 due to diabetic nephropathy was administered with febuxostat 10 mg per day for inadequate uric acid control during
admission. After 3 days of febuxostat treatment, his neutrophil count dropped from 5700 to 500/μL. In these 2 patients, neutrophil count
increased within 5 to 7 days after febuxostat discontinuation and with G-CSF support. Apparently, our patient had more advanced renal
disease and exposed to higher dose of febuxostat for longer duration (40 mg qd for 2.5 months), and then had lower neutropenic nadir and
exhibited longer neutropenic period of time. Table 1 shows comparison of clinical presentation of reported cases of febuxostat-induced
agranulocytosis. Clinical presentation of reported cases of febuxostat-induced agranulocytosis. As for patients with ESRD and hemodialysis,
febuxostat could improve endothelial dysfunction and reduce serum uric acid levels and oxidative stress. With these study results, it is
expected that more and more patients with CrCl less than 30 mL/min will receive this drug and some other patients may experience this
uncommon adverse effect, agranulocytosis, which is seldom reported in patients without advanced renal failure. Two possible mechanisms have
ever been proposed in drug-induced agranulocytosis. Immune-mediated destruction of circulating neutrophils suggests that a reactive
metabolite of febuxostat may irreversibly bind to the membrane of mature neutrophils. Another possible mechanism is the metabolite may
directly damage myeloid precursors. However, these speculations need to be tested in future studies. We report an ESRD patient experiencing
febuxostat-induced agranulocytosis, a rare but severe complication. When prescribing febuxostat to patients with severe CKD or ESRD,
clinicians should be aware of this potentially life-threatening adverse effect and a regular hemogram monitoring during the initial
treatment of febuxostat is recommended. Abbreviations: ANA = antinuclear antibody, anti-ENA = antiextractable nuclear antigen, CKD = chronic
kidney disease, CrCl = creatinine clearance, ESRD = end-stage renal disease, G-CSF = granulocyte colony-stimulating factor, WBC = white
blood count. The authors have no conflicts of interest to disclose.
