The diagnosis of Graves’ orbitopathy is usually straightforward. However, orbital diseases that mimick some clinical signs of Graves’
orbitopathy may cause diagnostic confusion, particularly when associated to some form of thyroid dysfunction. This report describes the rare
occurrence of localized inferior rectus muscle amyloidosis in a patient with autoimmune hypothyroidism, who was misdiagnosed as Graves’
orbitopathy. A 48-year-old man complained of painless progressive proptosis on the left side and intermittent vertical diplopia for 6
months. The diagnosis of Graves’ orbitopathy was entertained after magnetic resonance imaging revealing a markedly enlarged, tendon-sparing
inferior rectus enlargement on the left side, and an autoimmune hypothyroidism was disclosed on systemic medical workup. After no clinical
improvement with treatment, the patient was referred to an ophthalmologist and further investigation was performed. The presence of
calcification in the inferior rectus muscle on computed tomography, associated with the clinical findings led to a diagnostic biopsy, which
revealed amyloid deposition. This report emphasizes that a careful evaluation of atypical forms of Graves’ orbitopathy may be crucial and
should include, yet with rare occurrence, amyloidosis in its differential diagnosis. O diagnóstico de orbitopatia de Graves usualmente é
fácil de ser estabelecido. No entanto, doenças da órbita que simulam alguns sinais clínicos da orbitopatia de Graves podem levar à confusão
diagnóstica, particularmente quando associada à alguma forma de disfunção tireoidiana. Relatamos a ocorrência rara de amiloidose localizada
no músculo reto inferior em paciente com hipotireoidismo autoimune, que recebeu inicialmente o diagnóstico errôneo de orbitopatia de Graves.
Paciente masculino, 48 anos, com queixa de proptose progressiva e indolor do lado esquerdo e diplopia vertical intermitente há 6 meses. O
diagnóstico de orbitopatia de Graves foi considerado após a realização de ressonância magnética, que revelou aumento importante do músculo
reto inferior esquerdo, sem acometimento do tendão, e uma propedêutica sistêmica detectou hipotireoidismo autoimune. Como não houve melhora
com o tratamento clínico, o paciente foi encaminhado a um oftalmologista, que realizou nova investigação. A presença de calcificação no
músculo reto inferior na tomografia computadorizada, associada aos achados clínicos, levou a uma biópsia da lesão, que demonstrou a
deposição de material amiloide. Este relato enfatiza como uma avaliação minuciosa das formas atípicas de orbitopatia de Graves é essencial e
deve incluir a ocorrência, embora rara, de amiloidose no diagnóstico diferencial da orbitopatia de Graves. Graves’ orbitopathy (GO) refers
to a combination of adnexal and orbital findings caused by an immune-mediated inflammatory process, which induces expansion of the
extraocular muscles and orbital fat. Its pathophysiology is closely related to that of Graves’ disease.(1) Typical findings in GO include
proptosis, eyelid retraction, periorbital edema, chemosis and restrictive ophthalmoplegia that may precede, coincide with, or follow
systemic signs of thyroid disease. Upgaze is typically limited initially, since the inferior rectus muscle is the most frequently involved
extraocular muscle in GO.(2) Based on the clinical signs and laboratory testing for thyroid function, the diagnosis of GO is usually
straightforward. However, a few orbital diseases can mimick the clinical findings of GO leading to great diagnostic confusion, particularly
when the patient has been previously diagnosed as suffering from thyroid disorders.(3) This report describes a patient with autoimmune
hypothyroidism, who later presented unilateral proptosis from an enlarged inferior rectus muscle observed on magnetic resonance imaging. The
patient was initially misdiagnosed and treated by other physicians as GO. Considering an atypical limitation of depression of the eye and
presence of calcification on imaging studies, an alternative diagnosis was entertained and the patient was subsequently found to have
primary isolated amyloidosis of the orbit. A 48-year-old man complained of painless progressively enlarging lower eyelid bag swelling,
proptosis on the left side and vertical diplopia for 6 months (Figure 1). A systemic medical workup disclosed autoimmune hypothyroidism and
no other remarkable findings. Magnetic resonance imaging demonstrated a significantly enlarged, tendon-sparing inferior rectus muscle on the
left side (Figure 2). Based on such findings, the diagnosis of GO was entertained. Hypothyroidism was controlled with proper medication.
High-dose oral prednisone was prescribed for 2 months, but no clinical improvement occurred and the patient was referred to us for
specialized orbital consultation. Figure 1Photographs at presentation showing left lower eyelid bag swelling, left proptosis and extraocular
motility deficits. (A) Left upgaze; (B) Primary gaze; (C) Left downgaze Figure 2Coronal T1-weighted gadolinium-enhanced magnetic resonance
imaging of the orbits showing marked hyperintense enlarged inferior rectus muscle on the left On examination, visual acuity was normal in
both eyes. There was a 4-mm left proptosis, but no lid retraction on either side. Extraocular motility revealed both marked upgaze (-3
superior rectus) and downgaze (-2 inferior rectus) deficits (Figure 1). Extraocular motility of the right eye was normal. Because of
inferior rectus depression deficit and absence of lid retraction, the diagnosis of GO was questioned and an orbital computed tomography scan
was obtained. While the diagnosis of GO was still considered by the radiologist, the presence of discrete but well documented calcification
in the inferior rectus muscle (Figure 3) suggested an alternative diagnosis and a muscle biopsy was performed. Figure 3Computed tomography
scans of the orbits show enlarged left inferior rectus muscle with an infiltrated and calcified lesion. (A) Axial view; (B) Coronal view The
histopathological examination of tissue biopsies revealed extracellular amorphous and hyaline eosinophilic material on hematoxylin-eosin,
and orange-red staining with Congo red showed a green birefringence (Figures 4A and 4B). Immunohistochemistry showed positive amyloid A
protein staining (Figure 4C). Based on such findings, the histopathological diagnosis was defined as amyloid deposits. A thorough systemic
investigation was completely unrevealing and the diagnosis of primary localized orbital amyloidosis was made. No amyloid deposition was
found elsewhere in the body. Figure 4Histopathological study of the inferior rectus muscle of a patient with primary localized amyloidosis.
(A) Extracellular amorphous hyaline eosinophilic material in fibroadipose tissue (hematoxylin-eosin, 40X magnification); (B) Congo red
staining disclosing extracellular material (40X magnification); (C) Immunohistochemistry study with positive amyloid A protein staining (40X
magnification) Graves’ orbitopathy shows great variability of presenting symptoms and signs. Graves’ orbitopathy is usually bilateral, and
the most common cause of bilateral or even unilateral exophthalmos among adults.(4) Although eyelid retraction is its major associated sign,
the diagnosis of GO may also be made based on proptosis and strabismus.(2) Graves’ disease presenting as hyperthyroidism is the underlying
diagnosis in the majority (80%) of individuals with GO, but patients may present with primary autoimmune hypothyroidism or with no past or
present history of thyroid dysfunction.(2) Despite the fact that GO has a wide spectrum of clinical presentations, when atypical features of
GO diagnosis outweigh the typical expected findings, clinicians ought to reconsider their first presumptive diagnosis. As in our report, the
atypical ocular motility disturbance, lack of eyelid retraction and unilateral presentation, should alert the physician to pursue further
diagnostic investigation. In fact, when the inferior rectus muscle in involved in GO, extraocular motility is usually manifested by
restrictive muscle dysfunction. Therefore, patients do present limitation of upgaze, as demonstrated by our patient, but do not usually
display inferior rectus function deficit. Thus, the presence of significant deficit of eye depression in our case was an important clinical
finding to question the diagnosis of GO (Figure 1, bottom). Imaging studies play an important role in the differential diagnosis of GO.(5)
In our case, computed tomography showed enlargement of the inferior rectus muscle with a marked infiltrative calcified lesion driving the
diagnosis for new possibilities. However, magnetic resonance imaging is unable to detect calcified lesions and, as a single study, could
have reinforced the clinical misdiagnosis. There are numerous underlying causes for enlarged extraocular muscles: GO; orbital inflammation,
such as sarcoidosis or nonspecific (myositis); infections, as in Lyme disease, cysticercosis or trichinosis; vascular conditions, such as
carotid cavernous fistulas or arteriovenous malformation; myopathies; acromegaly; infiltrative disorders; and neoplastic disease.(6,7)
Calcified orbital lesions are described in metastatic tumors of the orbit, meningioma, teratoma, neurofibroma, sclerosing hemangioma,
chondrosarcoma and amyloidosis.(8) The clinical and imaging features of this case narrowed the possibilities to a neoplastic disease or a
deposition disorder. Neoplastic involvement of the extraocular muscles may be caused by local infiltration by adjacent tumors, including
primary orbital tumors and secondary neoplasms from periorbital sites, or by metastases from distant sites.(9) Amyloidosis is a deposition
disorder that may be localized or systemic, primary or secondary to chronic inflammatory diseases. Orbital involvement is more common in the
primary form of amyloidosis.(10) In both types of disease, after a negative systemic workup, tissue biopsy of the muscle affected is
required for certain diagnoses. In conclusion, a rare case of localized orbital amyloidosis to the extraocular muscle, misdiagnosed as
Graves’ orbitopathy, was reported. The authors stressed the importance of a careful diagnosis of some atypical Graves’ orbitopathies,
including amyloidosis, despite its rare occurrence, in their differential diagnosis.
