Von Hippel-Lindau (VHL) disease is a rare inherited, autosomal-dominant syndrome caused by heterozygous germline mutations in the VHL gene.
VHL patients are prone to develop benign and malignant tumors and cysts in multiple organ systems involving kidneys, pancreas and central
nervous system (CNS). The varied and complex clinical manifestations and radiological findings of VHL are of interest. We report a 38-year-
old woman with a ten-year history of VHL disease involving both pancreas and biliary system. To the best of our knowledge, direct
involvement of the biliary system in VHL disease has never been reported. The diagnosis was established via computed tomography scan and was
confirmed by genetic testing. The patient chose to receive conservative treatment and was followed up by magnetic resonance
cholangiopancreatography and magnetic resonance imaging examination. Renal angiomas and cysts were found during follow-up and there were no
evidence of malignant change of the pancreas and biliary system. We described the first case of VHL-associated choledochal cysts and may
present new visceral manifestations of VHL disease. Gastroenterologists should be aware of the clinical presentations of this rare disease
for early detection of its life-threatening manifestations. Von Hippel-Lindau (VHL) disease is a rare hereditary multisystem neoplasia
syndrome that results from a germline mutation in the VHL tumor suppressor gene located on chromosome 3p25. The incidence of VHL mutations
is roughly 1 in 36,000 live births, and penetrance reaches 90% at 65 years of age. Approximately 20% of VHL cases have no apparent family
history and appear to arise de novo. The affected patients mainly develop tumors of the central nervous system (CNS), kidneys, adrenals,
pancreas, and reproductive organ, and the median life expectancy of VHL patient is 49 years. The availability of a genetic test for
detection of individuals carrying the defective gene would not only increase the accuracy and availability of presymptomatic diagnosis of
VHL disease, but improve the clinical management of families with VHL disease, so as to reduce the complications of undetected disease which
can sometimes be devastating. A 38-year-old woman with a 10-year history of VHL disease was referred to our hospital for routine examination
of the disease. Ten years ago, she experienced dyspeptic symptoms and a huge abdominal mass was palpated during physical examination.
Computed tomography (CT) scan revealed multiple pancreatic cysts (Fig. 1A) and marked dilation of the extrahepatic common bile duct (CBD)
(Fig. 1B, arrow). She denied any history of pancreatic diseases and had no signs suggesting previous pancreatitis, but has been suffering
from diabetes for several years. Her family history was remarkable for polycystic pancreas in her mother who died of complications after
resection of pituitary tumors. The diagnosis VHL disease was suspected and was finally confirmed by genetic testing. The patient refused
surgical treatment at that time and was discharged after the symptom was relieved. (A) CT scan revealed multiple pancreatic cysts. (B)
Marked dilation of the extrahepatic biliary duct can be detected on CT scan (arrow). CT = computed tomography. During the past 10 years, the
patient suffered from intermittent abdominal pain and distension and was followed up annually by a standard protocol including laboratory
tests and ultrasound or CT examination. This time, the patient complained jaundice of 1 month duration and her laboratory tests revealed
elevated serum level of glucose (19.6 mmol/L, normal range 3.9–6.1 mmol/L), total bilirubin (69 μmol/L, normal range 1.7–21 μmol/L),
aspartate aminotransferase (92 U/L; normal range 5–37 U/L), alanine aminotransferase (137 U/L; normal range 5–40 U/L), gamma-glutamyl
transpeptidase (1040 U/L; normal range 0–50 U/L), and alkaline phosphatase (498 U/L; normal range 40–130 U/L). Tumor markers of carbohydrate
antigen (CA) 19-9, CA125, and carcinoembryonic antigen were all within normal values. Though CT scan demonstrated multiple calcifications in
the pancreas, the size of pancreatic cysts was smaller than that of 10 years ago (Fig. 2A). Magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography and
magnetic resonance imaging also showed the Todani type IV choledochal cyst, as well as multiple cystic lesions in the pancreas (Fig. 2B and
C). In addition, bilateral renal angiomas (Fig. 2C, arrows) and cysts, which were not found in previous examination, were also detected at
this time. Because further examinations did not reveal involvements of other organs and there were no evidence of malignant change of these
cystic lesions, the patient chose to receive conservative treatment and was followed up without evidence of deterioration. (A) Computed
tomography scan demonstrated that the size of pancreatic cysts was smaller than that of 10 years ago, but there were multiple calcifications
in the pancreas. (B) Magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography showed the Todani type IV choledochal cyst, as well as multiple cystic
lesions in the pancreas. (C) Magnetic resonance imaging detected bilateral renal angiomas (arrows) and cysts. The study was approved by the
Ethic Committee of Qilu Hospital, Shandong University, performed in accordance with the approved guidelines, and informed consent was
obtained from the patient. The first descriptions of the VHL disease were, respectively, reported by von Hippel and Lindau in 1911 and 1926.
Melmon and Rosen coined the current name of the disease and set out clinical criteria for its diagnosis in 1964. Nowadays, genetic testing
for VHL is widely available and is generally regarded as the standard for diagnosis of VHL disease, as germline mutations in the VHL tumor-
suppressor gene on chromosome 3 is reported to account for more than 95% of the VHL cases. The VHL tumor-suppressor gene encodes for the VHL
protein, which is involved in the degradation of hypoxia inducible factor 1α (HIF1α) through ubiquitin-dependent proteolysis. In cases of
VHL disease where the VHL gene is mutated, VHL protein does not bind to HIF1α and activates the expression of a number of factors, including
vascular endothelial growth factor, platelet-derived growth factor, erythropoietin, and transforming growth factor, which lead to
angiogenesis and tumorigenesis. Pancreatic lesions may develop in 35% to 77% of patients with VHL and most of them present as benign cysts
mainly comprised of simple cysts or rarely serous cystadenomas. These lesions have no malignant potential and are usually managed
conservatively with long-term follow-up. Positive and negative growing cysts may co-exist and can replace enough of the pancreas to cause
endocrine or exocrine insufficiency of the pancreas. Pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors (PNET) have been reported to occur with an incidence
of 17% in VHL patients. They are hormonally nonfunctional, often multiple, and are located throughout the pancreas. Although usually well
circumscribed and confined to the pancreas, VHL-associated PNET can metastasize. The size of the tumor appears to be related to the risk of
metastatic disease, and PNET with the size <1.5 cm is indicative of a benign nature. Resection is advocated for PNET >2 cm because malignant
change or metastasis is more common in such cases and remains an uncommon death cause of VHL disease. Though bile duct obstruction due to
pancreatic cysts compression has been previously described in several VHL cases, direct involvement of the biliary system in VHL disease has
never been reported. The most widely accepted Todani classification describes 5 types of choledochal cysts. Type I cyst is the most common
variety involving dilatation of a portion or entire CBD with normal intrahepatic duct; Type II is an isolated choledochal diverticulum; Type
III consists of a bulbous dilation (more than 1 cm) of the distal CBD near the ampulla; Type IV is characterized by multiple dilatations of
the intrahepatic and extrahepatic bile ducts; and Type V (Caroli disease) is cystic dilatation of intrahepatic biliary ducts without
extrahepatic duct disease. Our case presents the first case of VHL associated Type IV choledochal cysts. Taylor et al performed a study of
patients with an atypical manifestation of VHL, namely visceral cysts, followed in a Genetics Clinic. Cystic visceral lesions, such as renal
cysts, pancreatic cysts, and epididymal cystadenoma, were detected in about 30% of VHL patients. However, owing to their relatively benign
nature, cystic visceral lesions have received comparatively less attention in relation to their correlation with other phenotypic
manifestations of VHL disease and genotypic associations. Whether choledochal cysts are visceral manifestations of VHL disease deserves
further study. The presence of cysts, unaccompanied by other more typical lesions such as retinal or cerebellar hemangioblastoma, may
represent a major diagnostic problem, leading to errors in the assessment of disease status. Therefore, the majority of VHL patients are
diagnosed by neurologists or neurosurgeons after the discovery of CNS tumors. However, pancreatic lesions may precede any other
manifestation of VHL diseases by several years, and recognition permits earlier surveillance and detection for renal cell carcinoma and
cerebellar hemangioblastomas, which are the major causes of death in affected patients. Since pancreatic involvement alone rarely arouses
diagnostic suspicion of VHL disease, our case highlights the need for gastroenterologists to be aware of its clinical presentations. A
clinical presentation of multiple pancreatic cysts without previous pancreatic inflammatory episodes should suggest a diagnosis of VHL
disease and lead to a genetic test. Once the diagnosis has been confirmed, all family members at risk must be screened immediately, and
affected persons should undergo genetic counseling and rigorous follow-up to treat the life-threatening CNS and visceral manifestations of
the disease. Abbreviations: CA = carbohydrate antigen, CBD = common bile duct, CNS = central nervous system, CT = computed tomography, HIF =
hypoxia inducible factor, PNET = pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors, VHL = Von Hippel-Lindau. X-TZ, Q-YB, and FZ have contributed equally as
first author. This work was supported by the grants from the Taishan Scholars Program for Young Expert of Shandong Province (Grant No.
tsqn20161064). The authors have no conflicts of interest to disclose.
