Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is a complex autoimmune disease characterized by autoantibody production, complement activation, and
deposition of immune complexes in tissues and organs. SLE can involve any region of the visual system. Although ocular manifestations are
not part of the classification criteria for SLE, they can be observed in up to one-third of the patients with SLE. They are rarely reported
at the time of disease onset. Retinal vasculitis is usually associated with active generalized disease. Due to its low frequency, we report
a case of acute necrotizing retinal vasculitis as onset of SLE. A 25-year-old white female was referred to the rheumatology clinic with
gradually and rapid deterioration of the vision due to abnormal vessel permeability in the right fundus with edema along the vessels,
occlusion of arterial branches in the middle periphery with leakage of the dye in these areas and indentical but less prominent changes with
cotton wool spots in the papillomacular area and extensive hemorrhages in the left eye. The onset of malar rash, arthralgias and positive
antinuclear, anti-double stranded DNA, anti-ribosomal P and anti-β2 glycoprotein I antibodies with decreased C4 complement levels, as well
as the positive lupus-band test confirmed the diagnosis of SLE. Aggressive immunomodulating therapy with high-dose methylprednisolone,
intravenous immunoglobulin, and cyclophosphamide was used for suppression of the disease activity followed by azathioprine as maintaince
therapy. Substantial improvement and partial resorption of the vasculitic changes, including central retinal artery and vein, was achieved
prominently in the left eye. The study was conducted in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki and written informed consent was
obtained from the patient. Because of this, there is no need to conduct special ethic review and the ethical approval is not necessary.
Inclusion of ocular manifestations among the classification criteria for SLE would enable earlier establishment of the diagnosis and
therapeutic interventions in some instances of SLE. Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is a chronic, autoimmune, immune complex disease of
the connective tissue and may affect almost any part of the visual system. Although ocular manifestations are not part of the classification
criteria, they can be observed in up to one-third of patients with SLE. Ocular lesions (cotton wool spots, disc hyperemia, white retinal
patches) in SLE were first described in 1929 by R. Bergmeister. They are rarely reported at the time of disease onset. Due to its
infrequency we report a case of acute necrotizing retinal vasculitis as the first manifestation of SLE. On 20th of October 2014, a 25-year
old Lithuanian female was admitted to the Ophthalmology Department at Medical University, Sofia, Bulgaria, with complains of blurred vision
of the right eye, followed by gradual reduction of visual acuity to 6/20. Visual acuity of the left one was 20/20. The initial
ophthalmoscopy of the right eye showed normal optic disc cup, cotton wool spots along the vessels, edema in the posterior pole, and normal
view of the left eye. The fluorescein angiography (FA) showed abnormal vessel permeability in the fundus with edema along the vessels,
occlusion of arterial branches in the middle periphery with leakage of the dye in these areas in the right eye with no changes in the left
eye fundus (Figs. 1 and 2). Spectral domain optical coherence tomography (SP-OCT) revealed neuroretinal detachment in the fovea and retinal
edema of the nerve fiber layer (Fig. 3). During the admission period, the left eye was engaged as well, demonstrating similar symptoms and
signs in a less prominent pattern. Consequently ischemic macular edema in the right eye developed and as well as peripheral branch retinal
arteries occlusion. The examination of the left eye showed identical but less prominent changes with cotton wool spots in the papillomacular
area and extensive hemorrhages. Perimetry showed a central loss of visual field with areas of absolute and relative scotoma Fundus
photograph (22/10/2014). Right eye (left picture side) with multiple cotton wool spots in the posterior pole. Left eye (right picture
side)—without changes. Fluorescein angiography (22/10/2014). Right eye (left picture side) abnormal vessel permeability and formation of
local edema in the posterior pole. Branch retinal artery occlusion can be seen in the middle periphery. Left eye (right picture side)—more
discrete changes of the vessel permeability. SP-OCT of the right eye presenting neuroretinal detachment in the fovea and retinal edema of
the nerve fiber layer (taken on 28/10/2014). Two days after hospitalization the patient reported for onset of generalized arthralgias,
tenderness, and morning stiffness lasting 10 to 15 minutes. The patient had an intermittent fever up to 37.4°C. The ophthalmic status
deteriorated rapidly over the next 72 hours and the visual acuity of the right and left eyes dropped to FC (fingers counting) at 50 cm and
8/20, respectively. After consultation with rheumatologist, the patient was admitted in the Clinic of rheumatology for further examination
and treatment. On physical examination in the Clinic of Rheumatology, the patient presented with normal respiratory rate, blood pressure,
and heart rate. The musculoskeletal examination showed no pathological findings. The malar rash occurred in the facial area and on the back
accompanied with hair loss. The laboratory investigation revealed normal blood count, liver enzymes, electrolytes and urine tests, and
positive antinuclear antibody (ANA) titer (1:640 on immunofluorescence assay), anti-double stranded DNA antibodies (ELISA)—48 U/mL (normal
value < 25 U/ml), anti-ribosomal P antibodies—64 (> 50—highly positive value), anti-β2 glycoprotein I antibodies—12.1 U/mL
(<10 U/mL—negative) and decreased C4 complement levels to 0.06 g/L (normal ranges 0.165÷0.380 g/L). Anti-Smith-, anti-Ro-, anti-La-
antibodies, anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies, anti-myeloperoxidase (anti-MPO)-, anti-proteinase 3 antibodies, anticardiolipin
antibodies, lupus anticoagulant and cryoglobulins were negative. Lupus band test showed the presence of a homogeneous band of deposits of
IgM along the dermoepidermal junction. No abnormalities in chest x-rays were found. Magnetic resonance imaging of the head documented single
gliotic changes in the brain with nonspecific character. Serologic tests for Chlamydia trachomatis, syphilis (Treponema pallidum
haemagglutination), Varicella–Zoster virus (VZV), human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) 1, 2, hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg), anti-HCV
(hepatitis C virus) were negative, and testing for Cytomegalovirus (CMV) IgG and Epstein–Barr virus (EBV) IgG was positive. A diagnosis of
SLE was made based on the updated 1982 ACR revised classification criteria for SLE (1997). In attempt to decrease disease activity and
prevent visual loss, an aggressive immunomodulating therapy with high-dose corticosteroids (including methylprednisolone pulse therapy),
intravenous immunoglobulin (400 mg/kg/day for 5 days followed by maintenance therapy of 400 mg/kg for 1 day every 3 months), and
cyclophosphamide in dose 1 g intravenous every 15 days (6 doses altogether), followed by maintenance therapy with oral azathioprine in dose
2 × 50 mg/daily were administered. Low-molecular-weighted heparin was also given. On patient follow-up in December 2014, fundus photographs
and FA showed ischaemic maculopathy with compromised vessel permeability and with residual hemorrhages in the posterior pole of both eyes
(Figs. 4 and 5). The permeability of peripheral retinal arteries shows tendency of improvement. The visual acuity improved to FC at 2 m for
the right eye and 20/20 for the left. Second follow-up eye imaging in February 2015 showed substantially reduced subretinal exudates in the
posterior pole of the right eye, persistent macroischaemic zone, temporal to the macula, the presence of hemorrhages in the inferior
temporal zone. The cotton wool spots and vasculitic changes in both eyes were found to be partially resorbed. There was a substantial
improvement in the left eye. Single hemorrhages were present in the zone inferior to the papilla, the ischemic zones were found to be
reduced, with the vessel permeability being compromised only in the areas of the hemorrhages (Fig. 6). Fundus photograph (taken on
12/12/2014). Right eye (left figure side) and left eye (right figure side) with multiple cotton wool spots, hemorrhages, and branch retinal
artery occlusion in the posterior pole. Fluorescein angiography (taken on 12/12/2014). Right eye (left figure side) ischemic maculopathy and
tendency of improvement of vessel permeability in the periphery. Left eye (right figure side) ischemic maculopathy begins. Fundus
photograph, showing partial resorption of the cotton wool spots in the right eye (taken on 20/02/2015). Six months after the initial
symptoms laboratory and instrumental examination showed improvement—ANA titer decreased to 1:320, C4 was 0.13 g/L, and anti-ribosomal P
antibodies –16. All the other antibodies were within the normal ranges. Ocular manifestation of SLE can not only be sight threatening, but
the presence of active retinal vasculopathy is an extremely accurate guide to the existence of systemic disease activity. Retinal lesions in
SLE are of critical importance, both visually and prognostically. SLE may cause ocular disease by a number of mechanisms including immune
complex deposition and other antibody-related mechanisms, vasculitis, and thrombosis. The lesions of lupus retinopathy vary in appearance.
Cotton wool spots represent microinfarcts of the retina are the most common feature of eye involvement in SLE. Despite their characteristic
presence in SLE, the cotton wool spots are not pathognomonic for the disease. Other findings can be perivascular exudates, intraretinal
hemorrhages, and vasculitis. A less common presentation can be a large vessel occlusion. We describe a patient with acute necrotizing
retinal vasculitis as the first and leading manifestation of SLE. A distinctive sign is the absence of correlation between the picture,
found in both eyes and that in CNS (central nervous system), despite the presence of antiribosomal P antibodies. The slightly elevated
values of anti-β2GP I antibodies may be a contributing factor in the pathogenesis of the disease, although the antiphospholipid syndrome was
excluded. The conducted therapy not only achieved suppression of disease activity, but led to substantial improvement, more prominent in the
left eye, and partial resorption of the vasculitic changes, including central retinal artery and vein, which is common in the presence of
antiphospholipid antibodies (APA). Hall et al first described the link between severe lupus retinal vasculopathy and the presence of
antiphospholipid antibodies in 1984. The presence of APA is associated with more severe retinopathy and vascular occlusion. SLE shows
correlation with antiphospholipid syndrome (APS) and central nervous system (CNS) lupus. Antiribosomal P antibodies are found to correlate
with neuropsychiatric SLE. Vaso-occlusive retinopathy is a rare, potentially vision-threatening manifestation of SLE, which can be an
indicator of active disease. Early recognition of this condition and adequate and timely treatment should be administered in order to
preserve ocular function. The mainstay of treatment for SLE vaso-occlusive retinopathy is the administration of high doses of
corticosteroids and cytotoxic agents, such as cyclophosphamide, followed by low-dose systemic glucocorticoids in combination with other
immunosuppressant therapy for preventing disease flares. Ocular manifestations of lupus are a reflection of systemic disease. The presence
of ocular manifestations should alert the clinician to the likelihood of the presence of disease activity elsewhere. Therefore, all patients
with ocular lupus should be carefully evaluated for systemic involvement to detect potentially treatable and preventable complications of
the disease. Retinal specialists serve an important role in the overall care of patients with SLE. One large prospective study showed that
88% of SLE patients with retinopathy had active systemic disease. The SLE patients who developed retinopathy had a lower overall survival
rate as compared to patients without retinopathy over the same time period. Moreover, active CNS involvement in SLE, a significant cause of
patient morbidity, is more often found in patients with active retinopathy, retinal vaso-occlusive disease, and optic neuropathy. Therefore,
the presence of posterior segment findings in patients with SLE should prompt the retinal specialist to communicate with the rheumatologist
regarding the activity and severity of their mutual patient's disease. In addition, the ophthalmologist should include SLE in the
differential diagnosis of many retinal vascular and neuro-ophthalmic disorders. The ophthalmologist may play an important role in the care
of patients with SLE, since ocular inflammatory lesions may precede potentially serious extraocular disease. Early recognition by the
rheumatologist and prompt assessment by the ophthalmologist coordinated treatment strategies are key to reducing the ocular morbidity
associated with the disease. We believe that inclusion of ocular manifestations among the classification criteria for SLE (not only for
assessing the SLICC/ACR Damage Index) would enable earlier establishment of the diagnosis and therapeutic interventions in some instances of
SLE and may minimize mortality from this disease. Abbreviations: ACR = American College of Rheumatology, ANA = antinuclear antibody,
anti-β2GPI = anti-β2 glycoprotein I, anti-MPO = antimyeloperoxidase, APA = antiphospholipid antibodies, APS = antiphospholipid syndrome, CMV
= cytomegalovirus, CNS = central nervous system, EBV = Epstein–Barr virus, ELISA = enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay, FA = fluorescein
angiography, FC = fingers counting, HBsAg = hepatitis B surface antigen, HCV = hepatitis C virus, HIV = human immunodeficiency virus, IgG =
immunoglobulin G, IgM = immunoglobulin M, SLE = Systemic lupus erythematosus, SLICC/ACR = Systemic Lupus International Collaborative
Clinics/American College of Rheumatology, SP-OCT = Spectral domain optical coherence tomography, VZV = Varicella–Zoster virus. The authors
have no funding and conflicts of interest to disclose.
