Ebstein anomaly is a common congenital heart disease that may induce severe tricuspid regurgitation and dilation of the “atrialized” portion
of the right ventricle. Patients who undergo surgery to correct Ebstein anomaly are at high risk of postoperative right-sided heart failure,
yet little is known about what pre-, peri-, or postoperative procedures may help reduce this risk. Here, we describe 3 cases of adults with
Ebstein anomaly who underwent corrective surgery and in whom right-sided heart failure occurred with severe tricuspid regurgitation detected
by transesophageal echocardiography. Ebstein anomaly. Various approaches were applied to prevent right heart failure: perioperative control
of atrial and ventricle arrhythmia, protection of myocardium, reduction of right-side cardiac workload after cardiopulmonary bypass, and
mechanical support for right heart. One of the 3 patients died, another experienced kidney failure despite postoperative support on
extracorporeal membrane oxygenation, and the third patient survived without complications. Our case series suggests that surgical prognosis
can be improved through aggressive preoperative treatment, vasoactive and anti-arrhythmia medications, and comprehensive measures designed
to reduce myocardial injury, prevent myocardial edema, and reduce pre- and afterload on the right ventricle. In patients with Ebstein
anomaly, severe tricuspid regurgitation significantly increases preload on the right ventricle. In early disease, the body attempts to
maintain cardiac output of the right ventricle by dilating it and increasing cardiac contractility. In advanced disease, tricuspid
regurgitation severely expands both the right atrium and right ventricle, ultimately resulting in right ventricle failure. Patient quality
of life may be improved through tricuspid valve repair or replacement under cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB). However, such surgery and the
associated ischemia-reperfusion injury can increase the risk of right-sided heart failure. Such failure occurs in up to 13% of patients
following correction of Ebstein anomaly, and in-hospital mortality ranges from 5% to 16.6%. It is possible that studying the physiological
alterations contributing to right ventricle failure in patients with Ebstein anomaly can guide efforts to avoid such failure and thereby
improve surgical outcomes. Therefore, we reviewed 3 cases of surgical patients with Ebstein anomaly and right ventricle dysfunction.
Informed consent to be included in this report was obtained from the patients or their guardians. A 24-year-old female weighing 50 kg was
admitted to our hospital in November 2012 because of a cardiac murmur detected during routine testing before her wedding. She had a history
of recurrent respiratory tract infection as a child; during these infections, she often experienced palpitations, cyanosis, and dyspnea,
which resolved with rest. These symptoms disappeared after atrial septal defect repair and tricuspid valve repair when she was 9 years old.
Echocardiography after the most recent admission showed tricuspid valve hypoplasia with inferiorly displaced septal and posterior leaflets,
severe tricuspid regurgitation, substantial dilation of the right atrium and ventricle, reduced systolic function of the right ventricle
wall, and a relatively small left atrium and ventricle (Fig. 1). Preoperative echocardiography showing enlargement of the right chamber and
severe tricuspid regurgitation. These images come from Case 1 and are representative of all 3 cases in this series. RA = right atrium,
RV = right ventricle, TR = tricuspid regurgitation. Atrial tachycardia was recorded by routine ECG and right atrial tachycardia was
confirmed during electrophysiology assessment. Then it was corrected by catheter ablation, before she was transferred to the cardiac care
unit. One episode of heart block that progressed from first-degree to type II second-degree was recorded, during which heart rate varied
from 55 to 65 bpm. The patient did not report dyspnea or fatigue. On the following day, routine anesthesia was administered involving
inhalation of sevoflurane, intravenous infusion of propofol, and intermittent administration of sufentanil, midazolam, and cis-atracurium.
Hemodynamics remained stable during anesthesia. CPB was established by canalizing the right femoral vein and artery after mid-sternal
thoracotomy, then primed with Voluven (1000 mL), albumin (20 g), mannitol (100 g), and heparin (30 mg). During the 143-minute cross-clamping
period, cold-blood antegrade cardioplegia was administered by infusion at intervals of 25 to 28 minutes. When body temperature stabilized at
32 to 33°C, cone reconstruction of the tricuspid was performed, an epicardial pacemaker was inserted, and the atrial septal defect was
preserved. The cross-clamp was removed and the heart beat spontaneously recovered. Supportive CPB was again performed for 35 minutes, after
which the patient was weaned off bypass and supported on epinephrine (0.1 mcg/kg/min), milrinone (0.8 mcg/kg/min), and norepinephrine
(0.1 mcg/kg/min). The patient's heart rate was 100 to 110 bpm and arterial blood pressure was 90–100/50–60 mm Hg. CPB lasted for a total of
273 minutes. During that time, 4.5 U of packed red blood cells were transfused, and ultrafiltration was used to keep hematocrit above 20%.
Postoperative transesophageal echocardiography (TEE) showed mild tricuspid regurgitation, antegrade flow patency, and an atrial directional
shunt. After the patient arrived in the intensive care unit (ICU), her blood pressure decreased rapidly; it rose to 100/50 mm Hg with
infusion of arginine vasopressin (AVP, 0.04 U/min). Another episode of hypotension occurred involving a heart rate of 120 bpm and the
alternating presence of sinus and atrial rhythms; the condition resolved with AVP. Hypotension due to recurrent atrial tachycardia occurred
again on day 2, but it did not respond even to higher doses of vasoactive and inotropic agents. TEE revealed marked dilation of the right
ventricle and poor systolic and diastolic function. Extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO) was performed via femoral arterial and venous
cannulation. Overdrive pacemaker suppression restored normal sinus rhythm, which was maintained by intravenous infusion of amiodarone. The
patient was taken off ECMO on day 3 after achieving hemodynamic stability (mean arterial pressure , 85 mm Hg) and maintained at an inspired
O2 fraction (FiO2) of 55%; positive end-expiratory pressure (PEEP), 7 cmH2O; and Hb, 103.1 to 113.6 g/L. Refractory hypotension occurred
1 hour later, so thoracotomy followed by cannulation of the central aorta and right atrium was performed to reestablish ECMO. The patient
underwent an emergency bidirectional Glenn procedure in the operating room, and then was transferred back to the ICU under ECMO assistance.
She was discharged on day 4 at the request of her family and died immediately after discharge. A 61-year-old female weighing 89 kg presented
with cyanosis and palpitations that progressively worsened over 4 months. Physical examination showed an enlarged heart, regular heart rate,
and blood pressure of 143/88 mm Hg. Echocardiography showed the presence of Ebstein anomaly involving an apical-ward shifting tricuspid
valve, severe tricuspid regurgitation, patent foramen ovale (PFO) with bidirectional shunts, and a dilated right ventricle and left atrium.
Left ventricle size was normal. Electrocardiography showed complete right bundle branch block. Anesthesia and CPB proceeded normally. During
CPB, cold-blood cardioplegia infusion was administered at 25-minute intervals to protect the myocardium. During aortic cross-clamping
lasting 64 minutes and CPB lasting 100 minutes, the tricuspid was replaced, the PFO was closed and a temporary pacemaker was inserted. The
cross-clamp was removed and the heart beat spontaneously recovered. No tricuspid regurgitation was detected using postoperative TEE. The
patient was weaned off CPB and supported by inotropics (epinephrine, 0.05 mcg/kg/min; milrinone, 0.5 mcg/kg/min; norepinephrine,
0.05 mcg/kg/min). At 13 hours after surgery, the patient experienced an episode of ventricle tachycardia, during which the heart beat rose
to 226 bpm and central venous pressure (CVP) rose to 17 cmH2O; subsequently, MAP decreased to 35 mm Hg. Asynchronous defibrillation shock
was administered without success, then ECMO was performed using optimal inotropics (epinephrine, 0.18 mcg/kg/min; norepinephrine,
0.24 mcg/kg/min; AVP, 0.07 U/min) to stabilize hemodynamics. Grade 3 acute kidney injury (defined as described) was indicated by a decline
in daily urinary output to 545 mL, followed by oliguria and elevated levels of urea nitrogen (9.65 μmol/L), creatinine (203 μmol/L), and
uric acid (405 μmol/L). The patient was immediately given continuous renal replacement therapy (CRRT). When MAP stabilized at 50 to 100 mm
Hg and normal sinus rhythm returned at a heart beat of 70 to 110 bpm, the patient was gradually taken off vasoactive agents but kept on ECMO
assistance. TEE indicated progressive recovery of right ventricle function. On day 7, the patient was weaned off ECMO using low-dose
epinephrine and norepinephine, but she was maintained on CRRT. The patient underwent tracheotomy on day 12, and she was weaned off the
ventilator on day 23 due to recurrent arrhythmia during multiple CRRT. She was discharged from the ICU on day 31 with bedside CRRT. On day
61, she suffered from 1 episode of sudden cardiac arrest. After successful cardiopulmonary resuscitation, she was readmitted to the ICU and
extubated 4 days later. She subsequently experienced type I respiratory failure and sudden loss of consciousness. Endotracheal intubation
was repeated and respiratory support was provided for another 2 days, after which she was discharged from the ICU with continuous dialysis.
She was weaned off hemodialysis on day 92 but still required still required medical support even after surgical correction. She did not
develop any complications associated with right heart failure, based on telephone follow-up conducted on day 300 after surgery. A 59-year-
old female was admitted with palpitations and dyspnea on excision. TEE revealed the presence of Ebstein anomaly of the tricuspid valve with
apical displacement, severe tricuspid regurgitation, PFO, bidirectional atrial shunts, mild mitral regurgitation, substantial enlargement of
the right atrium, an atrialized right ventricle and left atrium, and a small left ventricle with normal systolic function.
Electrocardiography showed atrial fibrillation and complete right bundle branch block. Anesthesia was performed routinely, together with
intravenous administration of methylprednisolone (80 mg). At 20 minutes before surgery, the patient experienced an episode of ventricular
tachycardia, during which the heart rate rose to 180 to 200 bpm and blood pressure fell to 65/45 mm Hg. This condition resolved with
amiodarone (150 mg), and hemodynamics remained stable with epinephrine (0.02 mcg/kg/min) and milrinone (0.5 mcg/kg/min). CPB was performed
similarly as for Case 2. Priming was carried out using gelofusine (1250 mL), and 20% mannitol (250 mL), and methylprednisolone (500 mg). The
aorta was clamped and cold-blood cardioplegia was administered at the aortic root once at 20 mL/kg, and then again every 10 minutes
thereafter at 5 mL/kg. After cross-clamping for 59 minutes, albumin (22.5 g) was administered to increase colloid osmotic pressure. During
CPB, the patient underwent the following procedures: tricuspid valve replacement, partial atriectomy, unilateral bidirectional Glenn shunt
under hypothermia, and implantation of epicardial pacemaker leads. CPB was continued for another 63 minutes after these procedures, then the
patient was weaned off it using low-dose epinephrine (0.06 mcg/kg/min), milrinone (0.5 mcg/kg/min), and norepinephrine (0.09 mcg/kg/min).
Hemodynamics stabilized at a heart rate of 70 to 100 bpm, blood pressure of 80–100/40–60 mm Hg, and right atrium pressure of 5 mm Hg.
Systolic pressure was 30 mm Hg in both the right pulmonary artery and superior vena cava. TEE showed mild tricuspid regurgitation and
anastomotic patency in the superior vena cava–right pulmonary artery. Total CPB time was 132 minutes. During bypass, 1% sevoflurane was
administered by inhalation from an oxygenator, and mechanical ventilation was performed at low tidal volume with the following parameters:
FiO2, 21%; tidal volume (Vt), 100 mL; and respiratory rate (RR), 12 bpm. Ultrafiltration was used to maintain Hb concentration higher than
85 g/L and thereby avoid the need for allogeneic blood transfusion. After the patient's admission to the ICU (day 1), ventilation was
initiated with the following parameters: PEEP, <5 mm Hg; Vt, 450 mL; FiO2, 40%; and RR, 12 bpm. She presented with a nodal rhythm, heart
beat of 80 bpm, CVP of 14 to 21 cmH2O, and slightly low MAP of 54 mm Hg. MAP increased to 70 mm Hg with AVP (0.015 U/min). TEE showed a
right atrium size of 56 mm, an ejection fraction of 69%, and compromised right ventricle function with 6-mm systolic excursion of the
tricuspid annular plane. Tissue Doppler imaging showed myocardial systolic velocity of 6.9 cm/s. The patient suffered an episode of atrial
flutter on day 3, which returned to sinus rhythm after infusion of amiodarone (30 mg/h). On day 5, inotropics were progressively decreased:
AVP and norepinephrine were terminated, while epinephrine was maintained at 0.02 mcg/kg/min. The patient was later extubated, and she went
on to experience a few episodes of atrial flutter, which resolved under amiodarone therapy. On day 19, she was discharged with normal sinus
rhythm and stable hemodynamics. Subsequent clinical follow-up was uneventful on day 200. Ebstein anomaly is a common congenital heart
disease characterized by tricuspid valve hypoplasia with apically displaced septal and posterior leaflets, which may induce severe tricuspid
regurgitation and dilation of the “atrialized” portion of the right ventricle. Therefore, the major pathophysiology is diminished antegrade
blood flow through the right heart, decreased functional right ventricle size, and right heart dilation (Fig. 1). Myocardial contraction may
become too weak to circulate blood adequately through the pulmonary circulation and into the left heart system. This condition can be
exacerbated by surgically induced myocardial injury, often leading to right ventricle failure. This reduces left ventricular preload and
produces a pancake effect on the left ventricle. The resulting deficiency of blood in the left heart affects systemic response to vasoactive
and inotropic agents, so many patients require ECMO support. Of the 3 adults reviewed here who underwent surgery to correct Ebstein anomaly,
1 died and another experienced kidney failure despite postoperative support on ECMO. One or 2 strategies were used to prevent right
ventricle failure in Cases 1 and 2, while multiple strategies were used in Case 3 (Fig. 2). Our case series suggests that appropriate
perioperative treatment and protection of the myocardium can help prevent right-sided heart failure. Perioperative management of patients
with Ebstein anomaly to prevent right ventricle dysfunction. Patients with Ebstein anomaly have an extremely dilated right atrium and nearly
half (43%) experience persistent arrhythmia, most commonly in the form of atrial flutter, atrial fibrillation, and ventricle arrhythmia.
Such arrhythmia decreases cardiac output and increases myocardial oxygen consumption, which increases the risk of hemodynamic instability
after ventricle fibrillation as well as the risk of postoperative mortality. Both atrial and ventricle tachycardia occurred in Cases 1 and
2. Continuous amiodarone infusion and early pacemaker insertion to override ectopic rhythm allowed reasonable control of premature heart
beat. Gentle surgical manipulation can reduce mechanical injury to the myocardium and shorten the duration of surgery and myocardial
ischemia. We recommend keeping surgery as brief as possible. Excessively long aortic cross-clamp time and cardioplegia interval may partly
explain why Case 1 experienced postoperative right-sided heart malfunction despite good heart functional capacity at baseline. Another
factor in preserving right-sided heart functional capacity is reducing myocardial ischemia-reperfusion injury. Such injury can be reduced by
keeping perfusion duration within 10 to 15 minutes, which can still allow rapid recovery of myocardial metabolism and function. For these
reasons, we decided to limit cardioplegia to 10 minutes in Case 3. Early after surgery to correct Ebstein anomaly, patients often experience
postoperative myocardial edema, which can impair right-sided heart function. Such edema was the likely cause of the hypotension that
occurred within 24 hours after surgery in all 3 cases in our series. To reduce inflammation-induced edema, we primed all 3 cases for CPB
using mannitol. Priming of Case 3 also included colloids and albumin to increase colloid osmotic pressure. All 3 cases underwent
ultrafiltration to increase colloid osmotic pressure and effective hemoglobin concentration, which can boost oxygen delivery to the right-
sided heart and decrease myocardial edema. Although methylprednisolone was given in all 3 cases, it is noted that administration of
methylprednisolone should not be routinely recommended based on the recent evidence. In fact, hemoglobin levels in Cases 2 and 3 were
maintained higher than 8 g/dL. Postoperative hypotension in all 3 cases resolved with low-dose vasopressin, suggesting that the myocardial
edema was not severe enough to compromise hemodynamics. Proper circulating volume is important for preventing high preload on the right
ventricle. For this reason, we monitored CVP in the right atrium as well as TEE in Case 3 when weaning her off CPB. This monitoring
continued as part of bedside surveillance in the ICU. Intentionally leaving an atrial septal defect can lower cardiac workload and oxygen
consumption, which can compensate for poor function in the right side of the heart. In particular, it can increase LV preload, which can
compensate for inadequate left ventricle filling during RV failure and simultaneously may decrease preload on the right ventricle. However,
this approach in Case 1 did not appear to substantially reduce preload on the right ventricle, because no right-to-left shunting was
observed during postoperative failure of the right-sided heart. Case 3 received a unilateral bidirectional Glenn shunt, which may have
reduced preload on the right ventricle and thereby helped preserve residual function. The Glenn procedure can be a useful adjunct treatment
during repair of advanced Ebstein anomaly involving severe right ventricle dilation and dysfunction, especially in patients who cannot be
weaned off CPB. Pulmonary vascular resistance significantly affects right ventricle afterload. Pulmonary atelectasis and impaired gas
exchange can cause hypoxia, leading to pulmonary vasoconstriction and increased vascular resistance. Inflammation can exacerbate pulmonary
vasoconstriction. Therefore, low-tidal volume ventilation was continuously applied during CPB, particularly in Case 3, to attenuate acute
pulmonary injury and improve oxygenation following pulmonary vasoconstriction. Adequate PEEP was maintained during the postoperative period
to avoid lung collapse, reduce atelectasis, and improve gas exchange. One problem with positive-pressure ventilation is that the resulting
elevated intrathoracic pressure impairs contractibility and reduces cardiac output, thereby compromising right ventricle function. This
makes correct selection of the PEEP value important, yet optimal values are controversial. We chose to maintain PEEP within 5 mm Hg in all 3
cases. Vasoactive and inotropic agents are usually administered to support poor right ventricle contractility, and we used them in all 3
cases in our series. Epinephrine and norepinephrine are alpha receptor agonists. They can cause pulmonary artery contraction, which may
aggravate right ventricle afterload, and lead to vasoconstriction in vital organs, ultimately causing multiorgan malfunction. This may
explain why renal failure occurred in Case 2. In Case 3, we restricted doses of epinephrine and norepinephrine to 0.10 mcg/kg/min and of AVP
to 0.035 U/min, since higher AVP doses have been shown to cause life-threatening myocardial ischemia and sudden cardiac death in clinical
and animal studies, potentially as a result of coronary vasoconstriction. When higher doses of these agents are required, ECMO should be
considered to maintain hemodynamic stability. Despite the use of ECMO, Cases 1 and 2 suffered from severe pulmonary malfunction, and Case 1
died. Case 1 showed stable hemodynamics and respiratory function as well as obvious recovery of right-sided heart functional capacity after
3 days on ECMO. Unfortunately, after the patient was weaned off ECMO, she experienced further deterioration of pulmonary function followed
by hypoxemia, which may have been due to the prolonged ECMO duration. We did not perform the Glenn procedure in this patient since her
impaired lung function meant that oxygenation would not be satisfactory even if pulmonary blood was abundant. Instead, we provided ECMO
assistance until pulmonary function recovered. In conclusion, the case series described here is consistent with the idea that adults with
Ebstein anomaly undergoing tricuspid valve replacement or repair with or without a concomitant Glenn procedure are at high risk of
postoperative right-sided heart failure. Surgical prognosis can be improved through aggressive preoperative treatment, vasoactive and anti-
arrhythmia medications, and comprehensive measures designed to reduce myocardial injury, prevent myocardial edema, and reduce pre- and
afterload on the right ventricle. Abbreviations: AVP = arginine vasopressin, CPB = cardiopulmonary bypass, CRRT = continuous renal
replacement therapy, ECMO = extracorporeal membrane oxygenation, ICU = intensive care unit, MAP = mean arterial pressure, PEEP = positive
end-expiratory pressure, PFO = patent foramen ovale, TEE = transesophageal echocardiography. ML and JL contributed equally to this paper.
This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (nos. 81270324 and 81570374). The authors have no conflicts of
interest to disclose.
