SAPHO (Synovitis-Acne-Pustulosis-Hyperstosis-Osteitis) syndrome is a rare disease featured by its dermatological and osteoarthritic
disorders, the latter of which mainly affecting the anterior chest wall, spine, and sacroiliac joint. However, rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is
a chronic autoimmune disease, mainly affecting the synovial tissue of small joints in hands and feet. Here, we present an extremely rare
case diagnosed with both SAPHO syndrome and RA, with an onset interval of 10 years. So far, only 1 similar case has been reported in the
English literature. In Sep 2015, a 59-year-old female patient presented to our hospital, complaining of refractory low back pain, left
sternoclavicular joint pain, and palmoplanar pustulosis (PPP). In addition, RA had been diagnosed 10 years earlier in the patient,
manifested as pain and swelling in bilateral hands and wrists, accompanied by morning stiffness, as well as positive serologic tests. In our
hospital, laboratory tests revealed elevated inflammatory markers, and imaging examinations of relevant sites showed specific osteoarthritic
lesions for SAPHO syndrome. These findings lead us to make an easy diagnosis of the coexistence of SAPHO syndrome and RA in this petient.
Treatment with tripterygium wilfordii polyglycosidium and prednisone was introduced. Both dermatological and osteoarthritic symptoms
improved during a 3-month follow-up. Symptoms of RA were successfully controlled with prednisone and leflunomide since 2005. We present an
extremely rare case diagnosed with both SAPHO syndrome and RA, with an onset interval of 10 years. With this case report, we want to draw
attention to the diverse features of SAPHO syndrome. SAPHO (Synovitis-Acne-Pustulosis-Hyperstosis-Osteitis) syndrome is a rare disease
featured by its dermatological and osteoarthritic disorders. The osteoarthritic disorders mainly affect the anterior chest wall (ACW,
including sternoclavicular, manubriosternal, and costosternal joints), the spine and sacroiliac joint. However, the appendicular skeleton,
especially the small joint is a less frequently affected site in SAPHO. Howver, rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is a chronic inflammatory disease
mainly affecting the synovial tissue in joint, which can result in joint damage. It is seropositive for rheumatoid factor (RF) and anti-
cyclic citrullinated peptide (anti-CCP) antibody, with a predilection on small joints of the hand and wrist. Here, we present an extremely
rare case with both SAPHO syndrome and RA. In our patient, clinical features for SAPHO syndrome appeared in about 10 years after the
definite diagnosis of RA. This is a rare and exceptional condition. So far, only 1 similar case has been reported in the English literature.
With this case report, we want to draw attention to diverse features of SAPHO syndrome. A 59-year-old female patient presented with pain in
proximal interphalangeal (PIP) joints and wrist joints of bilateral hands accompanied by morning stiffness since March 2005 and was
diagnosed as RA based on RF positivity and anti-CCP antibody of 437AU/mL at local hospital. The results of laboratory tests were shown in
Table 1. Oral corticosteroid (prednisone, 20 mg qd) was prescribed, and symptoms were effectively alleviated. 2 months later, the patient's
symptoms remained stable, and maintenance doses of prednisone (10 mg qd) and leflunomide (10 mg qd) were introduced for RA. Symptoms of RA
were successfully controlled with prednisone and leflunomide ever since. The results of laboratory tests and treatments in our patient. In
April 2015, she was presented to local hospital complaining of low back pain, left sternoclavicular joint pain, and PPP in succession within
1 month. X-rays showed degenerative changes of the lumbar spine. CT showed focal cortical erosion with slight sclerosis of left
sternoclavicular joint. The results of laboratory tests showed elevated inflammatory markers, and details were shown in Table 1. A diagnosis
of SAPHO syndrome was made. Oral corticosteroid therapy (prednisone 15 mg qd) was introduced for 2 months. However, after slight remission,
relapse occurred in both dermatological and osteoarthritic symptoms. In Sep 2015, the patient presented to our hospital, complaining of
refractory low back pain, left sternoclavicular joint pain, and PPP. PPP was observed on physical examination (Fig. 1A–B). Laboratory tests
showed elevated ESR of 22 mm/h: seropositive RF and anti-CCP antibody of 302 AU/mL (Table 1). Bone scintigraphy, CT and MRI of the whole
spine, as well as MRI of the right hand were performed. Characteristic “bull's head sign,” which was caused by the tracer uptake in
bilateral sternoclavicular joints, bilateral costosternal joints, and manubriosternal joint, was observed on bony scintigraphy (Fig. 1C). CT
and MRI of the whole spine demonstrated multiple vertebral corner lesions in lumbar spine (Fig. 2A–F). MRI of the right hand revealed
thickened synovial membrane of PIP and metacarpophalangeal (MCP) joints, as well as joint effusion (Fig. 2G–H). The reminder of imaging
examinations was normal. A diagnosis of SAPHO syndrome in association with RA was made. Treatment with tripterygium wilfordii
polyglycosidium (TWP, 0.6 g tid) in combination with persistent prednisone (15 mg qd) was introduced. Both dermatological and osteoarthritic
symptoms improved. Pustules on the palms and soles suggestive of palmoplantar pustulosis (PPP) were shown (A,B). The “bull's head sign” was
demonstrated on 99mTc-MDP bony scintigraphy (C). PPP = palmoplantar pustulosis. (A–F) Coronal CT (A) and MRI (B) of the lumbar spine showed
multiple asymmetrically distributed vertebral corner lesions (arrows). Corresponding axial CT (C, E) and MR (D, F) images demonstrated that
the vertebral lesions mainly involved the vertebral corners, manifesting as cortical erosions and slight osteosclerosis as well as abnormal
signal intensities in surrounding cancellous bone (arrows). (G, H) Coronal MRI of the right hand revealed thickened synovial membranes of
proximal interphalangeal (PIP) and metacarpophalangeal (MCP) joints, as well as joint effusion. CT = computed tomography, MCP =
metacarpophalangeal, MRI = magnetic resonance imaging, PIP = proximal interphalangeal. During a 3-month follow-up, the relapse of SAPHO
syndrome was triggered by unauthorized discontinuation of prednisone. After returning to the previously prescribed medicine, the patient got
partial remission again. SAPHO syndrome is a unifying concept of a group of dermatological and osteoarthritic disorders. The pathogenesis of
SAPHO syndrome involves infectious, immunologic, and genetic factors. More recently, some researchers have suggested that SAPHO syndrome
should be classified within the spectrum of auto-inflammatory bone diseases. The natural history of SAPHO usually shows a relapsing-
remitting course, with relatively good prognostics. Currently, the most widely used diagnostic criteria for SAPHO is the one proposed by
Kahn and Khan in 1994, for which the including criteria are as follows: (1) osteoarthritic involvement associated with palmoplantar
pustulosis (PPP) and psoriasis vulgaris; (2) osteoarthritic involvement associated with severe acne; (3) isolated sterile
hyperostosis/osteitis (adults); (4) chronic recurrent multifocal osteomyelitis (children); and (5) osteoarthritic involvement associated
with chronic bowel diseases. On admission to our hospital, the patient's characteristic PPP and “bull's head sign” on bony scintigraphy lead
to an easy diagnosis of SAPHO syndrome. With regard to the low back pain, imaging examinations demonstrated multiple vertebral corner
lesions. Unfortunately, the imaging manifestations of the lumbar spine were not specific for SAPHO and could also be explained by the
degenerative changes. Hence, we could not determine whether our patient was with spinal involvement in SAPHO syndrome or not. For the ACW
and spinal involvement in our patient, ankylosing spondyloarthritis (AS) should also be taken into consideration for differential diagnosis.
However, neither clinical symptoms nor imaging features supported this diagnosis. Unfortunately, the HLA-B27 antigen was not tested for
further confirmation. However, RA is a chronic autoimmune disease, which is characterized by inflammation and deterioration of the synovial
joints. It can produce a loss of functionality and reduce quality of life. The seropositive RF and high-level anti-CCP antibody, as well as
symptoms and MRI of right hand in our patient, which rarely occurred in SAPHO syndrome, were also highly suggestive of RA, according to the
2010 ACR/EULAR diagnostic criteria for RA. Therefore, a diagnosis of SAPHO syndrome in association with RA was made. A limited number of
publications reported the prevalence of RF and anti-CCP antibody, which were significant predictors of RA, in patients with SAPHO syndrome.
However, 1.2% of the patients were RF positive in our SAPHO cohort with 164 patients. In another study, anti-CCP antibody was negative in
all the 69 patients tested. Only 1 similar case who concurrently fulfilled the diagnostic criteria for both RA and SAPHO syndrome was
previously reported. However, differently, our patient presented with SAPHO syndrome and RA with an onset interval of 10 years. In
conclusion, we reported a rare case of SAPHO syndrome in association with RA with a 10-year onset interval. SAPHO is a syndrome with diverse
features, and we are expecting to see additional special cases. Abbreviations: ACW = anterior chest wall, anti-CCP = anti-cyclic
citrullinated peptide, AS = ankylosing spondyloarthritis, MCP = metacarpophalangeal, PIP = proximal interphalangeal, PPP = palmoplantar
pustulosis, RA = rheumatoid arthritis, RF = rheumatoid factor, SAPHO = Synovitis-Acne-Pustulosis-Hyperstosis-Osteitis, TWP = tripterygium
wilfordii polyglycosidium. WX and CL contributed equally to the study. Funding: This work was supported by grants from National Natural
Science Foundation of China to Weihong Zhang ; the Scientific Research Foundation for the Returned Overseas Chinese Scholars to Weihong
Zhang; and the Science and Technology Foundation for the Selected Returned Overseas Chinese Scholars to Weihong Zhang. Ethical review and
written informed consent: The Institutional Review Board was waived for this retrospective study. Written informed consent was obtained from
the patient for publication of this case report and all accompanying images. The authors have no conflicts of interest to disclose.
