False-positive radioiodine (RAI) uptake related to chronic sinusitis and mucocele has only rarely been reported in patients with
differentiated thyroid cancer (DTC) even with the recent use of single photon emission tomography with computed tomography (SPECT/CT)
acquisition. No other etiology of sinus RAI uptake has been mentioned to date. We report five cases of DTC patients with sinus RAI uptake on
post-RAI scintigraphy. SPECT/CT clearly localized RAI uptake either in the sphenoid, the maxillary or the frontal sinus and highly suspected
mucosal thickening in four patients and sinus aspergilloma in one patient. These data confirm the possibility of false-positive sinus RAI
uptake, provide a new cause of such benign uptake, i.e. sinus aspergilloma, and demonstrate the clinical relevance of head and neck SPECT/CT
acquisition in the diagnosis of such uptake. Nuclear medicine physicians should be aware of this pitfall when interpreting post-RAI
scintigraphy. False-positive radioiodine (RAI) uptake in chronic frontal sinusitis was reported once in a patient with differentiated
thyroid cancer (DTC) and in mucocele twenty years ago using planar imaging. Although single photon emission tomography with computed
tomography (SPECT/CT) neck acquisition is commonly used in both diagnostic and post-therapeutic settings , there is still no other published
report of RAI uptake in sinuses, especially in the maxillary or sphenoid ones. Furthermore, no cause other than chronic sinusitis or
mucocele has evoked to explain sinus RAI uptake. We report here several cases of DTC patients showing RAI uptake in various sinuses
(frontal, maxillary or sphenoid sinus), most of them being related to sinus mucosal thickening and one to a pathologically confirmed
aspergilloma in a maxillary sinus. Each of these cases was clearly evidenced by SPECT/CT images. A 61-year-old woman with papillary thyroid
cancer (pT1b N0 Mx) was referred to our department in August 2010 for RAI ablation. Whole-body scan (WBS) with neck and thorax SPECT/CT
(Fig. 1) was performed five days after administration of 4110 MBq (111 mCi) of RAI after recombinant human thyrotropin (rhTSH) stimulation.
Stimulated thyroglobulin (Tg) was very low at 0.1 ng/ml without serum Tg antibodies (TgAb). WBS depicted an RAI focus in the nose related to
nasal RAI excretion and a left-sided moderate uptake, also suggesting physiological excretion. Interestingly, SPECT/CT showed that the
latter uptake was located in the sphenoid sinus with mucosal thickening. The patient had no symptoms. Sinus mucosal thickening had
disappeared on the CT scan control in 2014 and she was disease-free at the last visit in October 2016.Fig. 1Planar acquisition (anterior
view, Panel a), fused (Panel d) and CT (Panel e) images of SPECT/CT acquisition displaying RAI uptake in the left sphenoid sinus with
mucosal thickening on CT scan slices (blue arrow). RAI uptake is also present in the nose (Panels a, b and c, red arrow) Planar acquisition
(anterior view, Panel a), fused (Panel d) and CT (Panel e) images of SPECT/CT acquisition displaying RAI uptake in the left sphenoid sinus
with mucosal thickening on CT scan slices (blue arrow). RAI uptake is also present in the nose (Panels a, b and c, red arrow) A 51-year-old
woman with a 15-mm papillary thyroid cancer with microscopic extrathyroid extension and central node involvement (pT3 N1a Mx) was referred
for RAI ablation in January 2015. She was given 3570 MBq (96 mCi) of RAI after rhTSH. The stimulated Tg level was 0.3 ng/ml in the presence
of serum TgAb. Five days after treatment, WBS evidenced focal RAI uptake in the right part of the skull. SPECT/CT acquisition ruled out bone
metastasis and showed this uptake in the right frontal sinus to be associated with mucosal thickening (Fig. 2). The patient had no symptoms
and was disease-free at the last visit in October 2016.Fig. 2Planar acquisition (anterior view, Panel a), fused (Panel b) and CT (Panel c)
images of SPECT/CT acquisition displaying RAI uptake in the right part of the frontal sinus with mucosal thickening on CT scan slices (red
arrow). RAI uptake is also visible in the nose (Panels a, d and e, blue arrow) Planar acquisition (anterior view, Panel a), fused (Panel b)
and CT (Panel c) images of SPECT/CT acquisition displaying RAI uptake in the right part of the frontal sinus with mucosal thickening on CT
scan slices (red arrow). RAI uptake is also visible in the nose (Panels a, d and e, blue arrow) An 81-year-old woman with a papillary
thyroid cancer with lymph node involvement and microscopic extrathyroid extension (pT3 N1b Mx) was given 3681 MBq (99 mCi) of RAI in
September 2015. The stimulated Tg level was 67 ng/ml. Post-ablation WBS depicted a faint RAI uptake in the anterior right part of the skull.
SPECT/CT acquisition showed that this uptake was related to mucosal thickening in the frontal sinus (Fig. 3). For the sake of comparison, an
example of a bone metastasis of the skull which was faintly RAI-avid and well depicted by SPECT/CT acquisition is presented in Fig. 4. Three
months after RAI ablation, Tg level was at 22 ng/ml on levothyroxine. 18-Fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography with computed
tomography (18 F-FDG PET/CT) was performed in October 2016 and did not show any abnormal FDG uptake. We assumed that the patient had
biochemical persistence of disease.Fig. 3Planar acquisition (anterior view, Panel a), CT (Panel b) and fused (Panel c) images of SPECT/CT
acquisition displaying a faint RAI uptake in the right part of the frontal sinus with mucosal thickening on CT scan slices (blue arrow) Fig.
4A 56-year-old male patient complained of back pain related to a lytic bone metastasis which led to the discovery of a follicular thyroid
cancer. Post-ablation scintigraphy in March 2012 evidenced an intense RAI uptake in front of the spinal metastasis and other uptake in a rib
and in the skull. Planar acquisition (posterior view, Panel a), SPECT (Panel b) and fused (Panel c) images of SPECT/CT acquisition
displaying the faint RAI uptake in the left part of the skull are consistent with bone metastasis Planar acquisition (anterior view, Panel
a), CT (Panel b) and fused (Panel c) images of SPECT/CT acquisition displaying a faint RAI uptake in the right part of the frontal sinus
with mucosal thickening on CT scan slices (blue arrow) A 56-year-old male patient complained of back pain related to a lytic bone metastasis
which led to the discovery of a follicular thyroid cancer. Post-ablation scintigraphy in March 2012 evidenced an intense RAI uptake in front
of the spinal metastasis and other uptake in a rib and in the skull. Planar acquisition (posterior view, Panel a), SPECT (Panel b) and fused
(Panel c) images of SPECT/CT acquisition displaying the faint RAI uptake in the left part of the skull are consistent with bone metastasis A
49-year-old woman was referred for RAI ablation in April 2014 two months after total thyroidectomy for a 6-cm Hurtle cell carcinoma. She was
given 3770 MBq (102 mCi) of RAI after rhTSH stimulation. The stimulated Tg level was low at 0.3 ng/ml without serum TgAb. WBS performed five
days after treatment showed a right-sided moderate focus close to the nose suggesting physiologic excretion. On SPECT/CT this focus was
clearly located in the right maxillary sinus, which showed mucosal thickening. SPECT/CT also revealed a faint uptake in the left maxillary
sinus which was not seen on WBS (Fig. 5). The patient had no symptoms and was disease-free at the last visit in February 2016.Fig. 5Planar
acquisition (anterior view, Panel a), CT (Panel b) and fused (Panel c) images of SPECT/CT acquisition displaying RAI uptake in both the
right maxillary sinus (red arrow) and the left one (blue arrow) with bilateral mucosal thickening on CT scan slices Planar acquisition
(anterior view, Panel a), CT (Panel b) and fused (Panel c) images of SPECT/CT acquisition displaying RAI uptake in both the right maxillary
sinus (red arrow) and the left one (blue arrow) with bilateral mucosal thickening on CT scan slices A 38-year-old woman with a pT3 N1b M0
papillary thyroid cancer treated six years before by surgery and RAI ablation presented with an increased serum Tg level at 20 ng/ml on
levothyroxine. Neck ultrasound examination did not show any abnormal lymph nodes. After a multidisciplinary staff meeting, she was given a
second RAI treatment after rhTSH in June 2014, 1820 MBq (49 mCi). Stimulated Tg level was 61 ng/ml without serum TgAb. WBS performed two
days after RAI administration depicted an intense focal uptake in the left part of the face which was not present on the post-ablation WBS
in August 2008 (Fig. 6). Complementary head and neck SPECT/CT ruled out a bone lesion and showed that RAI uptake was located in the left
maxillary sinus. Hybrid CT scan evidenced a typical feature of aspergilloma with a dense soft-tissue mass including a calcification,
strongly suggesting a fungus ball (Fig. 7). The patient also complained of a stuffy nose. As WBS with SPECT/CT did not display malignant RAI
foci, 18 F-FDG PET/CT was performed and evidenced FDG nodal uptake in the upper mediastinum. The patient was operated on in September 2014
with sternotomy to remove the FDG-avid lymph node. Pathology confirmed malignancy. She then underwent left sinus meatotomy endoscopically in
February 2015 with removal of the fungus ball (Fig. 8). The stuffy nose complaint disappeared after surgery. At the last visit in April
2016, she was disease-free with a serum Tg level at 0.5 ng/ml.Fig. 6WBS after RAI ablation in August 2008 (Panel a) and WBS performed two
days after the second RAI administration in June 2014 (Panel b) in the same female patient with increased serum Tg level. An intense focal
RAI uptake was observed in the left part of the face in June 2014 (arrow) which was not present on the previous WBS Fig. 7Complementary head
and neck SPECT/CT was performed and confirmed that RAI uptake (fused images, Panels c & d) was located in the left maxillary sinus (hybrid
CT scan images, Panels a & b, blue arrow). Hybrid CT scan evidenced a typical feature of aspergilloma with a dense soft-tissue mass
including a calcification, suggesting a fungus ball Fig. 8The patient underwent left sinus meatotomy endoscopically in February 2015 with
removal of the fungus ball WBS after RAI ablation in August 2008 (Panel a) and WBS performed two days after the second RAI administration in
June 2014 (Panel b) in the same female patient with increased serum Tg level. An intense focal RAI uptake was observed in the left part of
the face in June 2014 (arrow) which was not present on the previous WBS Complementary head and neck SPECT/CT was performed and confirmed
that RAI uptake (fused images, Panels c & d) was located in the left maxillary sinus (hybrid CT scan images, Panels a & b, blue arrow).
Hybrid CT scan evidenced a typical feature of aspergilloma with a dense soft-tissue mass including a calcification, suggesting a fungus ball
The patient underwent left sinus meatotomy endoscopically in February 2015 with removal of the fungus ball This report describes five DTC
patients in whom post-RAI SPECT/CT acquisition revealed benign RAI uptake in various sinuses (sphenoid, frontal or maxillary sinus) related
to mucosal thickening in four patients and to aspergilloma in one. RAI sinus uptake has rarely been reported in the literature. Using planar
imaging in 1994, Bakheet et al. reported frontal RAI uptake in a patient with chronic sinusitis . In 1997, also with planar imaging, Matheja
et al. described frontal RAI uptake in a patient with mucocele . In a recent pictorial review using SPECT/CT , Glazer et al. listed unusual
physiological RAI biodistributions at the head and neck level but no sinus uptake SPECT/CT image was presented. Our five case reports
confirm the reality of sinus uptake and demonstrate that such benign uptake is not uncommon when SPECT/CT is routinely performed in
combination with WBS. In Case 3, despite the lack of histopathologic confirmation and the persistence of detectable Tg level without
identifiable structural lesion, we concluded that sinus uptake was benign based on the pattern of RAI uptake on WBS with SPECT/CT. In four
patients without any symptom of sinusitis, incidental RAI uptake was due to sinus mucosal thickening. The mechanism of RAI sinus uptake
remains elusive. As previously suggested , it might be due to the accumulation of inflammatory nasal secretions in the sinuses. As RAI is
excreted in the salivary glands and the nose, moderate uptake in the maxillary and sphenoid sinuses can mimic physiological excretion and
might remain unknown on WBS. Interestingly, RAI uptake was clearly related to aspergilloma in a maxillary sinus in the fifth patient. To our
knowledge, this is the first such case to be reported although false-positive lung RAI uptake due to aspergillosis has already been
documented . Various fungi are known to be able to take up iodine-125 . RAI uptake might be due to the presence of oxidants/antioxidants at
sites of inflammation or to endotoxins or enzymes released by the fungus. However, the exact mechanism of such an accumulation in fungal
cells remains unknown. Thanks to its ability to localize RAI foci accurately on hybrid low-dose CT scans, SPECT/CT imaging has considerably
altered the interpretation of planar scintigraphy in the last ten years. The improvement due to SPECT/CT is particularly significant when
anatomical landmarks are obviously lacking as on post-RAI scintigraphy. Specifically, SPECT/CT was highly suggestive of aspergilloma on the
hybrid CT scan without the need for further examinations in Case 5. In conclusion, false-positive RAI uptake in various sinuses related to
mucosal thickening and aspergilloma is possible in patients with DTC and is well demonstrated by SPECT/CT images. Nuclear medicine
physicians should be aware of such benign uptake when interpreting post-RAI scintigraphy. 18-Fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography
with computed tomography Differentiated thyroid cancer Radioiodine Recombinant human thyrotropin Single photon emission tomography with
computed tomography Thyroglobulin Thyroglobulin antibodies Whole-body scan We thank Sophie Taillard for assistance in preparation of the
manuscript. No funding was received. The datasets analyzed during the current study are available from the corresponding author on
reasonable request. RC conceived the study. RC and SB drafted the manuscript. RC, DB, JPR, DDR, EB and SB participated to data acquisition,
analysis and interpretation. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Written informed consent was obtained from the patients. All patients provided an informed consent for the use of personal data. Therefore,
for this retrospective analysis ethics committee approval was not requested. All data, including images, were anonymized and all patients
provided their consent for the use of personal data.
