This report presents a case of a 57- year old female with advanced Hepatic Alveolar Echinococcosis causing a secondary Budd-Chiari Syndrome
due to infiltration of the suprahepatic inferior vena cava treated successfully by liver transplantation. A temporary veno-venous bypass was
introduced, but a typical end to end cavo-caval anastomosis wasn’t possible in this case. In order to access a disease free part of the
inferior vena cava, an oval window of the diaphragm was excised, providing communication between the peritoneum and pericardium. A vascular
clamp was placed onto the right atrium which allowed for an atrial-caval anastomosis. The remainder of hepatectomy was performed in a
conventional manner. In the post-operative period and during the 18 month follow-up there were no complications. The patient remains in good
general condition with optimal graft function. A hepato-atrial anastomosis with a pericardial-peritoneum window during liver transplantation
is feasible and extends the curability potential for patients with advanced Hepatic Alveolar Echinococcosis considered for liver
transplantation. Advanced hepatic alveococcosis due to its volume may interfere with the hepatic veins and inferior vena cava (IVC) causing
Budd-Chiari syndrome (BCS) which is an indication for liver transplantation (LTx). The thrombosis and stricture may be found at any point,
ranging from the hepatic veins to the right atrium along the IVC [1, 2]. When this is the case, hepatectomy of the diseased liver requires
supra hepatic IVC clamping at the right atrium, with later end-to-end anastomosis with the donor liver IVC cuff . Our report presents a rare
approach during hepatectomy, perioperative management and excellent postoperative results of the patient. A 57 year old female patient was
qualified for LTx due to BCS caused by an advanced Echinococcus multilocularis infection. The patient received Albendazole treatment for
several years which was terminated two years prior to transplantation due to a developed post-drug pancytopenia. No other anthelminthic
drugs were administered until LTx. Furthermore, portal hypertension, esophageal and gastric varices, portal hypertensive gastropathy, and
ascites were present at time of transplant qualification. Celiac disease, gastro-esophageal reflux disease (GERD), and L1 vertebral fracture
were associating commorbidities. The size of the alveolar lesion in segments III–VIII was 110 × 75 × 70 mm (Fig. 1a) and involved the
hepatic vein confluence, causing narrowing of the IVC lumen with mild but disturbed blood flow. The intrahepatic IVC was free of
abnormalities. The lesion occluded the left and middle hepatic veins, extending towards the confluence of the right hepatic vein with the
IVC (Fig. 1b). The lumen was narrowed, with an organized thrombus visible on ultrasound, but blood flow was maintained.Fig. 1Pre-Transplant
CT-scans presenting: a Computed Tomography of a 110 × 75 × 70 mm hepatic alveolar echinoccocal cyst located in segments III–VIII; b Hepatic
vein thrombosis – Budd-Chiari Syndrome Pre-Transplant CT-scans presenting: a Computed Tomography of a 110 × 75 × 70 mm hepatic alveolar
echinoccocal cyst located in segments III–VIII; b Hepatic vein thrombosis – Budd-Chiari Syndrome The donor liver was retrieved from a
43 year old dead brain donor (DBD) matching the recipient’s blood type and similar weight and height values. The LTx began on the 16th
September, 2014 with the use of an extra-corporeal veno-venous bypass. The portal vein and hepatoduodenal ligament was difficult to dissect
as it was embodied in post-inflammatory scar tissue. The suprahepatic IVC along with the surrounding diaphragm was involved in the alveolar
lesion. A 10 × 10 cm window of the diaphragm was excised creating an opening of the right pleural cavity and pericardium (Fig. 2). Thus,
with the exposure of the pericardial part of the IVC, the vascular clamp was placed on the atrium because the whole IVC was infiltrated by
the lesion. The infrahepatic part of the IVC was clamped in a standard procedure. Both ends of the IVC were then cut, and the liver was
explanted along with its intrahepatic IVC (Fig. 3a). The clamping of the right atrium caused cardiac arrhythmia and the electrocardiogram
showed signs of myocardial ischemia. This was managed by the anesthesiologist and hemodynamic stability was achieved throughout the
operation.Fig. 2Clamp applied to the right atrium and positioning of the sutures Fig. 3 a Explanted diseased liver; b Alveolar Cyst with E.
multilocularis in the explanted liver; c Strictured lumen of the supra hepatic inferior vena cava, which was invaded by an alveolar lesion
(marked by needle). Dissected diaphragm measured 10 × 10 cm Clamp applied to the right atrium and positioning of the sutures a Explanted
diseased liver; b Alveolar Cyst with E. multilocularis in the explanted liver; c Strictured lumen of the supra hepatic inferior vena cava,
which was invaded by an alveolar lesion (marked by needle). Dissected diaphragm measured 10 × 10 cm Two 24 fr pleural drains were placed
into the apex and base of the right pleural space. The supra hepatic IVC of the donor graft was sutured directly to the right atrium using
an end-to-end anastomosis. The excised window in the diaphragm was minimized by suturing its free ends together without the use of a Prolene
patch, and without complete closure of the diaphragm in order to avoid stenosis of the IVC–atrium anastomosis. Communication between the
pericardium and right pleural cavity was intentionally sustained to allow for fluid drainage. After completion of the portal anastomosis
clamps from the IVC and portal vein were removed. A mild, 1-min reperfusion syndrome with a systolic pressure of 60 mmHg was observed after
8 h 6 min of cold ischemia. At that point, pleural drainage was enabled. Further steps during transplantation were performed in a standard
procedure. Intraoperative blood loss was estimated at 1000 ml; thus, 2 units of red blood concentrate and 4 units of fresh frozen plasma
were transfused. The anhepatic phase was 136 min. Total operation time was 6.5 h. An abdominal ultrasound was performed on the first post-
operative day (POD), showing good vascular flow. An echocardiography performed on the second POD found no abnormalities. The pleural drain
was removed on the third POD and a chest X-ray confirmed no signs of pneumothorax or effusion in the right pleural space. Time in the
intensive transplant care unit was 3.5 days. The immunosuppressive regimen consisted of tacrolimus 0.05 mg/kg × 2 and prednisolone
20 mg × 1. The patient’s liver tests recovered gradually. Computed tomography showed satisfactory and functioning hepato-atrial anastomosis
(Fig. 4a and b). She was discharged on POD 25 and continued with tacrolimus 7 mg × 2, mycophenolate mofetil 500 mg × 2 and albendazole
treatment 400 mg × once daily. Intolerance of the latter drug was not observed during hospitalization. At an 18-month follow-up and
recurrence free period, the patient is doing well with good overall outcome and graft function.Fig. 4Post-transplant computed tomography
scans: a Anterior CT image of hepato-atrial (atrial-caval) anastomosis; b 3-Dimensional computed tomography reconstruction of the vascular
image presenting the hepato-atrial anastomosis Post-transplant computed tomography scans: a Anterior CT image of hepato-atrial (atrial-
caval) anastomosis; b 3-Dimensional computed tomography reconstruction of the vascular image presenting the hepato-atrial anastomosis
Hepatic alveolar echinococcosis (HAE) is a parasitic disease that develops slowly. Very often, the first symptoms manifest, as in our case
of E. multilocularis (Fig. 3b), at a very advanced, mature stage. In the first imaging examinations, HAE can resemble a tumor like
hepatocellular carcinoma. Clinical signs, such as mechanical jaundice, repetitive cholangitis, liver abscess, portal hypertension,
esophageal varices, and sepsis are secondary to the disease. Additionally, Budd-Chiari Syndrome might be present . Surgical resection
usually is the main treatment for this disease; however, because alveolar symptoms tend to be absent for a long period of time, the cysts
tend to be very advanced at diagnosis. Large lesions without response to drug treatment and with invasion of the vascular tree (Fig. 3c) of
the liver will eventually develop BCS, thus should be directly qualified for LTx. This seems to be the only final treatment for HAE, and 90%
of patients die within 10 years without surgery . LTx due to HAE has been reported to have increased morbidity and mortality. A thorough
examination is compulsory with MRI and three-dimensional computed tomography reconstruction in order to minimize intraoperative risk . An
early remark on the use of veno-venous bypass allows for better intraoperative preparation and greatly minimizes the risk of bowel
congestion, shortens the hepatectomy time and limits the need for excessive maneuvers with the diseased liver, reducing the risk of tissue
impairment and excessive bleeding . A pericardial-peritoneum window as a procedure has been reported many times, but is performed due to
malignant diseases or pericardial effusion and not during LTx [8–10, 12–14]. Several authors state that a pericardial-peritoneum window acts
as a collection chamber for pericardial fluid, which is later absorbed through the peritoneum [9, 10]. In our opinion, the implantation of
the donor liver through such a suprahepatic atrium-IVC cuff end-to-end anastomosis allows both lobes of the liver to firmly press against
the diaphragm. This creates a continuation of the thoracic-abdominal barrier, simultaneously avoiding future diaphragmatic hernia. Thus,
leaving a 20-40-mm opening around the IVC anastomosis avoids its occlusion in the future, provides prompt drainage of fluid, and leaves the
diaphragm under less tension. There has been several publications, mainly for initial BCS, presenting different solutions of cavoplasty in
order to perform an atrial-caval anastomosis [15, 16]. Though principles are similar, our report presents how to manage a rare case of
advanced HAE and in result secondary BCS. LTx is feasible when performing an IVC hepato-atrial anastomosis. Patient’s outcome is not
impaired, and the post-operative results, follow up, and quality of life is good. Therefor even advanced cases of HAE may be successfully
treated with liver transplantation. Budd-Chiari Syndrome Celiac Disease Esophageal Varices Gastro-Esophageal Reflux Disease Hepatic Alveolar
Echinococcosis Inferior vena cava Liver transplantation Post-drug pancytopenia syndrome Portal Hypertensive Gastropathy Post-operative day
Not Applicable. The authors have adhered to CARE guidelines/methodology. There is no funding to be declared for the preparation of this
manuscript. The publication fee will be funded by the Medical University of Warsaw. The datasets generated and/or analysed during the
current study are available from the corresponding author on reasonable request. KK designed the report; KK, RP, KD, MKo performed the
surgical procedure; PM, JR-W, UO-J post-operatively treated the patient; KK collected the patient’s clinical data; KK, RP, JR-W, PR, MG, PM,
WP, MKo analyzed the data; KK, RP, PM, MKr wrote and revised the paper. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. The authors
declare that they have no competing interests. The authors did obtain written permission from the patient to publish the manuscript and
permission is extended to the publication of images in this case report. The authors did attain the permission of the Medical University of
Warsaw Bioethics Committee (reference # AKBE157/16) to publish the data and written, informed consent to participate was obtained from the
patient.
