Organizing pneumonia (OP) is a clinicopathological entity characterized by granulation tissue plugs in the lumen of small airways, alveolar
ducts, and alveoli. OP can be cryptogenic (primary) (COP) or secondary to various lung injuries. We report the case of a 38-year-old male
smoker with COP presenting in the form of diffuse micronodules on computed tomography (CT) scan and describe the clinical, radiological, and
functional characteristics of micronodular pattern of organizing pneumonia (MNOP) based on a review of the literature including 14 cases.
Patients were younger (36.3 ± 15.5 years) than those with the classical form of OP. The clinical presentation was subacute in all cases with
a mean duration of symptoms before admission of 14.5 ± 13.2 days. The radiological pattern was characterized by centrilobular nodules and
“bud-in-tree” sign in 86.7% of patients. The diagnosis was based on histological examination of transbronchial (28.6%) or surgical biopsies
(71.4%). An associated condition was identified in 65% of cases and included illicit substance abuse (44.5%), myeloproliferative disease
(33.5%), and infections (22%). Steroid therapy was effective in all patients with improvement of symptoms and documented radiologic
resolution. No relapse was recorded. MNOP should be recognized and distinguished from other diagnoses, mainly infectious bronchiolitis and
disseminated tumor, as it requires early specific steroid therapy. Organizing pneumonia (OP) is a pathological entity characterized by the
presence of polypoid granulation tissue in the lumen of bronchioles and alveolar ducts associated with variable degrees of interstitial and
air space infiltration with mononuclear cells and foamy macrophages. Many conditions have been reported to be associated with OP, including
pulmonary infection, connective tissue diseases, drug toxicity, and gastroesophageal reflux disease. In some cases, no etiology can be
identified and OP is considered to be idiopathic, also called cryptogenic organizing pneumonia (COP). In most cases, the radiological
presentation is characterized by multiple air space consolidations with a subpleural distribution or areas of ground glass lung
infiltration. However, many other unusual presentations have also been reported. We report a case of acute OP presenting with a diffuse
micronodular pattern mimicking miliary lung infiltration and discuss the clinical features of this unusual form of OP on the basis of a
review of the literature. A 38-year-old man presented with an 8-day history of fever, myalgia, dry cough, dyspnea, and fatigue. He was a
current smoker (10 cigarettes a day) and reported no occupational exposure. His medical history was unremarkable. Symptoms persisted despite
antibiotic therapy with amoxicillin/clavulanic acid and roxithromycin. At admission, temperature was 38.5°C, respiratory rate was 24/minute,
auscultation was normal and no extrathoracic signs were present. Chest X-ray showed diffuse micronodular opacities (Fig. 1A). High-
resolution computed tomography (CT) demonstrated a profusion of well-delimited centrilobular micronodules, 2 mm in diameter, with subpleural
sparing and a “bud in tree” pattern in some areas (Fig. 1B). Interbronchial lymph nodes were present (Fig. 1C). Arterial blood gases at 21%
FiO2 showed PaO2 66 mm Hg, PaCO2 35 mm Hg, pH 7.44. Laboratory parameters were as follows: leukocyte count: 19.8 × 109/L (85%
polymorphonuclear cells), C-reactive protein: 305 mg/L and fibrinogen: 12 g/L. Serum electrolytes, and renal and liver function tests were
normal, as well as serological tests for Legionella pneumonia, Mycoplasma, Chlamydia, Coxiella psittaci, hepatitis C and B viruses, and HIV.
Antinuclear antibody, perinuclear antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody (P-ANCA), cytoplasmic-ANCA, and cyclic citrullinated protein antibody
tests were negative. Urine cocaine test was negative. Bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) showed 400 × 103 cells/mL, comprising 73% macrophages,
18% lymphocytes, 5% neutrophils, and 4% eosinophils. Golde score was normal (40). Testing for Pneumocystis jiroveci, Mycobacterium
tuberculosis, and yeasts remained negative. Transbronchial biopsies were not contributive. (A) Chest X-ray showing a micronodular pattern.
(B) HRCT scan showing diffuse small centrilobular nodules. (C) Presence of interbronchial lymph nodes. (D) Improvement of miliary pattern
after steroid therapy. Pulmonary function test results were as follows: FEV1: 1.34 L (34%), FVC: 1.94 L (40%), FEV1/VC: 69%, TLC: 4.24 L
(61%), DLCO: 11.59 mL min−1 mm Hg−1 (42%) and KCO: 3.83 mL min−1 mm Hg−1 (97%). To rule out an infectious disease, lung biopsies were
performed under video-assisted thoracoscopy (VATS). Gross examination of slides disclosed a patchy nodular pattern. On microscopic
examination, lung architecture was preserved. Nodules consisted in buds of granulation tissue fulfilling distal airspaces and extending from
one alveolus to the next one, mimicking in some areas a butterfly pattern. Fibrotic buds disclosed bronchiolocentric predominance and in
some areas extended into bronchiolar lumen. No granuloma was seen in lung parenchyma or in peribronchiolar areas. Mild inflammatory
infiltrates was seen around fibrotic areas but interstitial inflammation was not present at distance of fibrotic plugs (Fig. 2). No pathogen
was identified on Grocott and PAS staining and on biopsy cultures. This histological pattern was consistent with OP. The lack of marked
interstitial inflammation and absence of granuloma ruled out other diagnoses such as sarcoidosis or hypersensitivity pneumonia. Histological
examination of VATS lung biopsy. (A) Hematoxylin Phloxin Saffron staining (×2.5) proliferation of plump fibroblasts embedded in an edematous
stroma forming intra luminal plugs in alveolar ducts and alveoli (arrows). Note the presence of a weak interstitial inflammatory
infiltration at distance of fibrotic changes. No granuloma was observed in peribronchial areas or in interalveolar septa. (B) Orcein
staining (×5). Buds of granulation tissue filling distal airspaces, extending from 1 alveolus to the next. Intraluminal fibrotic changes
constitute the prominent lesion. No inflammation of vascular walls was observed. Oral corticosteroid therapy was started at 1 mg/kg/day.
Improvement of dyspnea was observed after 1 month of treatment, and CT micronodules had dramatically decreased (Fig. 1D). Steroids were
tapered over 6 months and lung CT scan returned to normal with no signs of relapse at 5-year follow-up. Informed consent was signed by the
patient. A PubMed database search including the terms “organizing pneumonia,” “cryptogenic,” “secondary,” “micronodules,” and “miliary,”
identified 10 articles from January 1, 1997 (first description) to December 31, 2015, documenting 14 cases of OP presenting an exclusive
micronodular pattern. Demographic, clinical, laboratory, imaging data, and associated conditions were analyzed from 15 case reports
including our personal case. Statistical analysis was performed using Epi Info statistical software (version 3.2.2). Data are expressed as
mean ± standard deviation . Comparisons were performed with Student t test and Fisher exact test. A P-value <0.05 was considered
significant. The mean age at diagnosis was 37.6 ± 14.8 (Table 1). The M/F sex ratio was 9/6. Seven patients were smokers (58.3%). Acute or
subacute presentation was observed in all cases with a mean duration of symptoms before admission of 14.5 ± 13.2 days. The most common
symptoms were cough (93.3%), dyspnea on exertion or at rest (80%), sputum (40%), and mild fever in 46.7%, associated with a flu-like
syndrome in 2 cases (data not shown). Crackles were present in 40% of cases. On CT scan, all patients presented a diffuse micronodular
pattern with no apicobasal gradient. Micronodules were small (1–5 mm), with centrilobular distribution (86.7%) and demonstrated a “tree in
bud” pattern in 7 cases. Interestingly, relative subpleural sparing was observed in some cases. Associated features included interbronchial
lymph nodes (n = 2), ground glass pattern (n = 2), pleural effusion (n = 1), pneumomediastinum (n = 1). Diagnosis (n = 14) was obtained by
surgery in 10 cases (VATS in 8 cases and open lung biopsy in 2 cases) or transbronchial biopsy by fiberoptic bronchoscopy in 4 cases. One
patient declined surgical lung biopsy. Histological examination (n = 14) displayed a typical pattern of OP in 13 cases and acute fibrinous
OP in 1 case. An associated condition was present in 9 cases, including myeloid proliferative disease (n = 3), infection (n = 2), marijuana
exposure (n = 4). Four of these patients were severely immunocompromised. In the remaining 6 cases, no cause was identified and a diagnosis
of COP was considered (Table 2). Although this study is limited by the small number of patients, no difference in terms of demographic,
clinical, and imaging data was observed between COP and secondary OP. Clinical characteristics of patients with cryptogenic and secondary
MNOP. Conditions associated with MNOP. Three patients died early due to hematologic malignancy (n = 2) or acute respiratory failure (n = 1).
Improvement was obtained with steroid treatment in all remaining cases. Long-term follow-up was available for only 6 patients, ranging from
1 to 60 months. No recurrence was reported. Usual clinical and imaging presentations of OP have been well characterized in large series in
the literature. The clinical course is usually subacute in 50- to 60-year-old patients. Cough, dyspnea, fever, and weigh loss are the main
symptoms. Sparse crackles and bronchial breath sounds can be heard in areas of air space consolidation. Two main presentations have been
described on CT scan, including patchy air space consolidation areas with a migratory course and ground glass opacities predominantly in the
lung periphery. However, many other appearances have been reported, consisting of solitary or multiple nodules, focal pneumonia, perilobular
consolidations, curved bands of consolidation, atoll sign. Our review focused on an unusual radiological presentation corresponding to
diffuse micronodular pattern mimicking miliary lung infiltration. The prevalence of micronodular pattern in OP (MNOP) in radiological series
is estimated to range from 9.5% to 24% depending on whether OP is secondary or idiopathic and/or the subject's immune status. Patients are
slightly younger than those with the classical form of OP. A male predominance is observed both in idiopathic and secondary MNOP,
contrasting with the female predominance reported in 2 recent larger series of classical OP. The clinical presentation of MNOP does not
differ from that of other forms of OP. Cough, dyspnea, and fever are the more prevalent symptoms. However, a rapidly progressive course
appears to be more commonly observed in MNOP than in other forms. In this review, the duration of symptoms before admission was available in
10 patients. Five of these patients had a median duration of symptoms ≤8 days and the remaining 5 patients reported a duration of symptoms
of 2 to 6 weeks. Nine patients presented hypoxemia and required oxygen supplementation, indicating poor clinical tolerance. A similar CT
scan pattern was observed in all the cases with widespread lung micronodules without diffuse ground glass opacities, airspace consolidation,
or cavitation. Interestingly, micronodules did not show random but a centrilobular distribution with “bud in tree” pattern in most cases,
suggesting a primarily bronchiolar disorder such as infectious bronchiolitis or hypersensitivity pneumonia. Nevertheless, disseminated
tuberculosis was considered as differential diagnosis in 5 cases and led to initiation of antituberculosis therapy. In the remaining cases,
empirical antibiotic therapy was administered for suspected community-acquired bronchiolitis. In all but one of the published cases,
invasive diagnostic procedures were performed due to the inefficacy of antiinfectious therapy. Video-assisted thoracoscopic or open lung
biopsy was considered to provide the best tissue specimens to establish the histological diagnosis of idiopathic interstitial pneumonia.
However, in large series of OP, the histological diagnosis was obtained on transbronchial biopsy specimens from 31% to 67% of cases. In the
present review, the diagnosis was established on TBB specimens in 28.6% of patients. However, the sensitivity of the TBB procedure to
demonstrate this micronodular pattern could not be assessed as TBB was performed in only 5 patients of this review (data not shown). As
previously reported, OP may be cryptogenic (COP) or secondary to various conditions, including drugs and substance abuse, infections,
connective tissue disorders, solid tumors, and hematologic malignancies. In large series, secondary OP represented 24% to 45% of all cases
of OP. Interestingly, MNOP was associated with another disease in 65% of cases (Table 2), mainly illicit substance abuse and
myeloproliferative disease. The nodular pattern of OP has been known for a long time to be more frequently observed in immunocompromised
patients. In the present review, MNOP was associated with hematologic malignancy or renal transplantation in 4 patients, corresponding to
29% of the overall cohort, but 44% of all cases of secondary OP. The results of this review are in agreement with those of a series of 43
consecutive patients with biopsy-proven OP, showing that nodules on CT scan were present in 55% of immunocompromised but in only 22% of
immunocompetent patients. As in other forms of OP, steroid therapy is markedly effective with rapid improvement of symptoms and radiological
resolution in most cases. In classical forms of OP, relapses occur in 58% of cases, but do not adversely impact outcome. No relapse was
reported in the present review. Of note, 1 marijuana smoker died from acute respiratory failure. In conclusion, this literature review
highlights the clinical and radiological characteristics of an unusual micronodular pattern of cryptogenic or secondary OP. Subacute
presentation and radiological features of widespread bronchiolar nodules should lead to consider differential diagnoses such as infectious
bronchiolitis especially in immunocompromised patients, hypersensitivity pneumonia or disseminated tumor. The definitive diagnosis requires
transbronchial biopsy or video-assisted thoracoscopic lung biopsy. Steroid therapy usually allows improvement of symptoms and resolution of
radiological signs. Abbreviations: COP = cryptogenic organizing pneumonia, CT = computed tomography, MNOP = micronodular pattern of
organizing pneumonia, OP = organizing pneumonia, VATS = video-assisted thoracoscopy. The authors have no conflicts of interest to disclose.
