Dermatophytosis caused by Microsporum gypseum is rare, especially in infants, with few published cases. Diagnosis in this age group is
frequently delayed. We review the literature and report 4 new cases of tinea of glabrous skin caused by M. gypseum mimicking eczema in
infants. Considering new and previously reported cases, half of patients were exposed to sand, emphasizing the importance of this
transmission vehicle in this age group. In conclusion, although rare, dermatophytosis by M. gypseum should be part of the differential
diagnosis of inflammatory dermatosis in infants. A clinical suspicion and the availability of culture are keys to the diagnosis. Microsporum
gypseum is a geophilic fungus that has a worldwide distribution and rarely causes disease in humans. This fungus may be found in dogs and
cats (which can be asymptomatic carriers), in sick human beings, and especially in contaminated soil.1-4 Dermatophytosis caused by M.
gypseum usually manifests as an inflammatory mycosis that typically affects the glabrous skin and scalp, especially in children.5 Rarely, it
can present as onychomycosis.4 Only few cases of dermatophytosis caused by M. gypseum in children under two years have been published in the
literature.2-9 The aim of this study was to verify, taking into account a review of the literature and a new series of cases, if the
dermatophytosis caused by M. gypseum present preferred topography in this age group, if the sand is important as a source of infection for
infants and if there is a tendency to late diagnosis in our midst. The cases were treated between April 2009 and May 2013. We assessed three
males and one female patients, aged between 15 and 24 months. All were from the metropolitan region of Porto Alegre, Rio Grande do Sul,
Brazil. Two patients had contact with sand. All patients presented development of dermatosis for more than three months and all exhibited
erythematous scaly plate with pustules (Table 1 and Figure 1). Infants with dermatophytosis by Microsporum gypseum Figure 1 (A) Case 1 -
male patient with well-defined erythematous-desquamative plaques in popliteal fossa with few pustules; (B) Case 3 - female patient with
erythematous-desquamative plaques with polycyclic edges and pustules on the buttocks; (C) Case 4 - male patient with erythematous-
desquamative plaques with irregular edges and pustules in malar region (A) Case 1 - male patient with well-defined erythematous-desquamative
plaques in popliteal fossa with few pustules; (B) Case 3 - female patient with erythematous-desquamative plaques with polycyclic edges and
pustules on the buttocks; (C) Case 4 - male patient with erythematous-desquamative plaques with irregular edges and pustules in malar region
Three of four patients (patients 1, 2 and 4) received the wrong diagnosis of infected atopic dermatitis, and one patient (patient 3), of
diaper dermatitis. All were mistakenly treated with topical steroids prescribed by the pediatrician. Scales and pustule contents were
collected for direct mycological examination (DME). Microscopy was performed after clarification with KOH solution 20%. Septated ant
branched hyphae were identified in only one patient. All patients had positive culture for M. gypseum. Macroscopic examination of the
culture showed powdery filamentous colony, sand-colored and with "sugar with cinnamon" aspect. Microscopic inspection revealed abundant
multiseptated macroconidia, symmetrical, ellipsoidal and with rounded ends (Figure 2). Three patients received oral treatment with
terbinafine (62.5 mg per day) for seven days. All patients were treated with topical imidazole (three with bifonazole and one with
clotrimazole) for 30 to 60 days. Figure 2 Powdery filamentous colony, sand-colored and with "sugar with cinnamon" aspect Powdery filamentous
colony, sand-colored and with "sugar with cinnamon" aspect Dermatophytoses are common fungal infections in tropical countries and may
represent a public health problem. The dermatophytosis caused by M. gypseum represents from 0.7% to 5% of all dermatophytosis.4 The
infection outbreaks are exceptional and have been reported in Italy, Colombia, Brazil and Spain.4,5,7,10 When this occurs, dermatophytosis
caused by M. gypseum can be assigned to a specific virulence of the fungus, to a high concentration of the fungus in the soil, to a low
resistance of the host, or to the presence of previous skin lesion.2,7 Infants may be especially vulnerable, because in addition to play
often on the floor, they belong to an age group with increased susceptibility to infections. Moreover, the creation of pets is a common
practice, which causes contamination of the floor and increases the risk of infection.2,4 Only eight cases involving infants were published
in English and Portuguese literature (Table 2).2-9 Dermatophytosis review by Microsporum gypseum in infants The intense history of contact
with sand was present in 50% of our cases, data coinciding with those described in the literature.5,8,9 In Brazil, it is common for parents
to take their children to play in sandboxes in playgrounds. It is also common for infants to play in sandboxes in preschool. A frequent
problem is that most of the sandboxes are not protected to prevent the entry of domestic animals such as dogs and cats. It is likely that
these factors, combined with other environmental factors and the increased susceptibility of infants to infection, put our country as a risk
for this dermatophytosis. The cases reported here, added to the ones previously published, show that more than 50% of them occurred in
Brazil. In addition, our patients had lesions located predominantly in the lower limbs and gluteal region, reinforcing the importance of
sand in the transmission of this fungus. In the literature, the most affected sites were the lower limbs and head.1,4,6-8 Lesions caused by
M. gypseum are generally characterized by erythematous scaly plates with pustules inside or on the edges. So, they can easily simulate
different inflammatory dermatitis and secondary infection.2,6 The prescription of topical corticosteroids and antibiotics is common and
often delay diagnosis.3 Other clinical patterns can occur, such as erythematous plaque with well-defined edges, characteristic of mycosis,
or atypical lesions, such as plates with sclerodermiform, eczematid, lichenoid, psoriasiform or crusted aspects.1,4 Among infants, the
differential diagnosis should be made mainly with seborrheic eczema, atopic eczema and bacterial infection.1,7 The diagnosis is made with
DME and culture for fungi. The treatment may be carried out with topical imidazole or terbinafine (for at least four weeks). The association
of oral antifungals can be indicated in large or symptomatic cases (due to the inflammatory process) in order to speed up the resolution of
the condition. In this case, terbinafine, itraconazole, fluconazole, or griseofulvin may be used.3,4,6,9 We report the cases of four infants
with dermatophytosis caused by M. gypseum, with a mean time of evolution before diagnosis of 3.5 months, showing a clear delay in diagnosis.
This delay can occur: (1) because the inflammatory nature of the lesions can mimic other inflammatory dermatoses; (2) because this is an age
in which dermatophytosis are infrequent; or (3) because DME can be negative. In summary, this paper warns dermatologists of the need to
include this differential diagnosis in the evaluation of inflammatory skin lesions in infants, especially if there is a history of exposure
to sand or soil. Finally, the clinical suspicion and the availability of culture are essential for diagnosis. Conflict of Interest: None
Financial Support: None Study conducted at Dermatology Service of Universidade Federal de Ciências da Saúde de Porto Alegre (UFCSPA) – Porto
Alegre (RS), Brazil. We thank Dr. Gerson Vettorato for the support.
