The patient had symptoms of GERD and the reflux even caused the symptom of cough. Gaining weight is a risk factor for the treatment of
reflux as it could exacerbated symptoms of reflux and the drug treatment is not effective. Surgical intervention becomes necessary when
there is failure following conservative medical therapy or the patient. The patient was not satisfied with the drug treatment. Superior
mesenteric artery syndrome, gastroesophageal reflux disease. Laparoscopic Toupet fundoplication with duodenojejunostomy. The patient
discharged from hospital 10 days after surgery without any postoperative complication. The patient achieved complete relief of symptoms and
discontinuation of drug. Superior mesenteric artery (SMA) syndrome may manifest the symptoms of GERD such as heartburn, acid reflux and
cough. It is necessary to complete examination to exclude superior mesenteric artery syndrome for these patients. Laparoscopic
fundoplication with duodenojejunostomy provided an effective treatment for patients who failed drug treatment. Superior mesenteric artery
(SMA) syndrome is an upper intestinal (the third part of duodenum) obstruction caused by SMA compression. The main symptoms of the disease
are postprandial discomfort, abdominal pain, early satiety, and so on. The patient presented in our report suffered from heartburn, cough,
and vomiting and was diagnosed as having gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) in a local hospital. The patient insisted on surgical
treatment because the disease had a severe impact on his quality of life and it was difficult for him to control symptoms after regular
medicine including proton pump inhibitor (PPI) and gastrointestinal prokinetic drug. The patient had both the typical symptoms and the
extraesophageal symptoms of GERD, was diagnosed as having SMA syndrome, and failed drug treatment. We performed laparoscopic Toupet
fundoplication and hiatal hernia repair with duodenojejunostomy for the management of SMA syndrome with reflux symptoms. A 57-year-old male
had a 3-year history of heartburn and a 1-year history of cough. The patient began to suffer heartburn, regurgitation, nausea, bloating, and
vomiting 3 years ago. Acid could reflux to his mouth sometimes. He had to pad the head in order to reduce the incidence of reflux while
sleeping. The patient began to cough while symptoms of regurgitation and heartburn aggravated 1 year ago. The endoscopy result was
esophagitis LA-C and atrophic gastritis with erosion. The patient was diagnosed as having GERD in a local hospital and received treatment of
life adjustment and medicine including PPI and gastrointestinal prokinetic drug. The symptoms of cough, heartburn, and vomiting were
relieved after taking drugs such as PPI in the beginning. However, the patient felt that symptoms were aggravated in the past 2 months and
reoccurred after he stopping using drugs. He had a 5-kg weight loss during a period of 2 years. The body mass index of the patient was
calculated to be 19.3 after hospital admission in our center. Physical examination revealed only abdominal slight tenderness. The DeMeester
score was 1.56 and the result did not meet the standard of acid reflux disease. The lower esophageal sphincter pressure was lower than
normal, all swallowing is invalid peristalsis. Because the patient's 24-hour pH monitoring did not meet the standard of acid reflux disease,
the patient completed upper gastrointestinal radiography to exclude other causes. The results of the upper gastrointestinal radiography
revealed esophageal reflux disease and possible gastritis; hence, SMA oppression syndrome (descending part of duodenal dilation, the
contrast agent blocked through the tract, formation characteristic of penholder oppression) was considered (Fig. 1). Abdominal CT scan
revealed a 25° angle between the SMA and the aorta, a distance of 7.8 mm. Upper gastrointestinal series shows an abrupt cutoff of the third
portion of the duodenum (white arrow) and dilatations of the first and second portions of the duodenum. The patient was diagnosed as having
SMA syndrome. We combined laparoscopic Toupet fundoplication with duodenojejunostomy to manage SMA syndrome complicating extraesophageal
symptoms. The patient gave consent to publish this case report and confirmed its content. Five incisions were made to insert trocar under
general anesthesia. After the hepatogastric ligament was dissected with an ultrasonic scalpel, we saw a small part of gastric fundus and
omental enter into the chest. We held hernia sac back into the abdominal cavity. Then we separated the right diaphragmatic peritoneum and
the esophagus peritoneal to expose the abdominal segment of the esophagus at least 3 cm. In the left diaphragmatic crura, an increased
diaphragmatic hiatus, approximately 3 × 4 cm, was found. A window was created below the lower esophagus. On the one hand, the gastric fundus
was dissected by dividing short gastric vessels; on the other hand, the mediastinal structures, including pleura, pericardium, vagus nerves,
and aorta, were identified and preserved. The diaphragmatic crura were sewed behind the esophagus with 2 nonabsorbable sutures. Then a
posterior 270° two-centimeter-long fundoplication was constructed with 3 interrupted nonabsorbable stitches (Fig. 2). Finding the duodenum
suspensory ligament in the left of transverse mesocolon mesentery, the duodenum dilated obviously and was oppressed by SMA. Approximately
25 cm apart from the duodenum suspensory ligament, the proximal jejunum and duodenum level department were fixed with 2-0 nonabsorbable
sutures. Two windows, approximately 1 cm, were opened in jejunum and duodenum with an ultrasonic scalpel before the gastrointestinal
anastomosis stapler was inserted and plugged in. Then the anastomotic gap was closed and reinforced with stitches to finish the side-to-side
anastomosis. The anastomotic gap was approximately 4 cm in diameter (Fig. 3). Intraoperative picture of Toupet fundoplication and the fold
valve (white arrow). Intraoperative picture of duodenojejunostomy and the anastomosis (white arrow). The operation lasted approximately 4
hours. The patient was discharged from the hospital on the 10th day after operation without any complication. Upper gastrointestinal
radiography after operation shows barium passing through the third portion of the duodenum (Fig. 4). The patient achieved complete relief of
symptoms and discontinuation of drug 1 year after operation. Upper gastrointestinal series shows barium passing through the third portion of
the duodenum (white arrow). The SMA syndrome is a rare condition and the prevalence is estimated to be 0.013% to 0.3% in the general
population. Its manifestation is complex, including postprandial epigastric pain, nausea, vomiting, anorexia, and weight loss. The most
typical and frequent clinical finding is intermittent or postprandial abdominal pain (59–81%). However, a few patients manifest symptoms
such as heartburn, cough, and vomiting because the obstruction of the duodenum could lead to the reflux of the gastric content. The SMA
syndrome could be the etiology of GERD whose prevalence is as high as 2.5% to 7.8% in East Asia. So it is critical to make sure of the
diagnosis, especially for the patient with a negative result in 24-hour pH monitoring. Angiographic, ultrasonic, and CT have been widely
used for the diagnosis of the SMA syndrome. Ultrasonic is considered as a rapid, repeatable, noninvasive, and low-cost way to perform a
diagnostic procedure and is useful in screening of patients who have showed some clinical symptoms. Angiographic, barium meal, and CT scan
show dilatation of the proximal duodenum and the abrupt cutoff part of the obstructed tract, together with a decreased aortomesenteric
distance as well as aortomesenteric angle. Aortomesenteric angles <22° to 25° and distances <8 mm have correlated well with the diagnosis of
SMA syndrome. One study shows that the aortomesenteric distance may reduce to 2 to 8 mm. Although the diagnosis of SMA is controversial,
upper gastrointestinal series using contrast has been used as a standard in diagnosis of SMA syndrome for decades. In our report, CT scan
and upper gastrointestinal radiography were used to make a definite diagnosis. Marked weight loss and corrective spinal surgery are thought
of as predisposing factors as they affect the fat that acts as a cushion between the aorta and the mesenteric artery. So conservative
treatment such as gaining weight was used to increase vascular space between the SMA and the aorta to relieve obstruction in one study.
Total parenteral nutrition is used for patients who cannot tolerate oral feeds and has proved to be an effective treatment. The patient had
typical symptoms of GERD such as heartburn and regurgitation, and extraesophageal symptoms such as cough. Gaining weight for the treatment
of reflux might exacerbate symptoms of reflux, and thus was a risk factor. This formed a vicious cycle for the treatment of the patient to
some extent. Surgical intervention becomes necessary when there is failure after conservative medical therapy. In addition, the patient was
diagnosed as having esophagitis LA-C and had extraesophageal symptoms at the same time. So we decided to treat the patient with laparoscopic
duodenojejunostomy, which has been considered as an alternate choice as it offers a high likelihood of excellent outcome. We performed
fundus fundoplication and esophageal hiatal hernia repair because the patient was diagnosed as having esophagitis LA-C and had
extraesophageal symptoms. Considering the patient has a poor esophageal motility, we chose laparoscopic Toupet fundoplication that is
thought to have a lower risk of postoperative dysphagia compared with laparoscopic Nissen fundoplication. And laparoscopic Toupet
fundoplication has been proven to be effective in treating patients with extraesophageal symptoms such as cough. We once performed only
laparoscopic Nissen fundoplication for a patient in our hospital who had a similar condition; however, the symptom of abdominal pain was not
relieved. Another patient receiving amputation of the ligament of Treitz and duodenal construction still needed to take medicine
approximately 1 year after operation. This is also the reason that we combine laparoscopic fundoplication with duodenojejunostomy to solve
the problem. SMA syndrome could manifest as extraesophageal symptoms such as cough. Laparoscopic fundoplication with duodenojejunostomy is
an effective treatment for patients with such conditions. Abbreviations: GERD = gastroesophageal reflux disease, PPI = proton pump
inhibitor, SMA = superior mesenteric artery. The authors have no conflicts of interest to disclose.
