Squamoid eccrine ductal carcinoma is an eccrine carcinoma subtype, and only twelve cases have been reported until now. It is a rare tumor
and its histopathological diagnosis is difficult. Almost half of patients are misdiagnosed as squamous cell carcinoma by the incisional
biopsy. We report the thirteenth case of squamoid eccrine ductal carcinoma. Female patient, 72 years old, in the last 6 months presenting
erythematous, keratotic and ulcerated papules on the nose. The incisional biopsy diagnosed squamoid eccrine ductal carcinoma. After
excision, histopathology revealed positive margins. A wideningmargins surgery and grafting were performed, which again resulted in positive
margins. The patient was then referred for radiotherapy. After 25 sessions, the injury reappeared. After another surgery, although the
intraoperative biopsy showed free surgical margins, the product of resection revealed persistent lesion. Distinction between squamoid
eccrine ductal carcinoma and squamous cell carcinoma is important because of the more aggressive nature of the first, which requires wider
margins surgery to avoid recurrence. Squamoid eccrine ductal carcinoma (SEDC) is an extremely rare subtype of eccrine carcinoma (EC): only
twelve cases were reported in the literature to date (Table 1).1 Due to the rarity of this tumor and to the difficulty of its
histopathologic diagnosis, almost half of the cases are incorrectly diagnosed as squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) in the initial biopsy.2 The
origin of lesion is controversial, as it may represent a SCC emerging from eccrine duct, an EC subtype with extensive squamous
differentiation or a biphenotypic carcinoma.1 We report the thirteenth case of SEDC in the literature, whose diagnosis was possible in the
incisional biopsy. Published papers describing cases of squamoid eccrine ductal carcinoma Three recurrences despite complete surgical
excision ; With lymph node involvement; With metastasis Female patient, 72 years, presenting erythematous papule for the last six months,
slightly keratotic and ulcerated in the nasal dorsum to the right (Figure 1). As comorbidities, she had systemic hypertension, dyslipidemia
and dyspepsia, for which she was in use of captopril, hydrochlorothiazide, simvastatin and omeprazole. An incisional biopsy of the lesion
was performed, and the histological diagnosis was SEDC, corroborated by immunohistochemistry: epithelial membrane antigen (EMA) and
carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) were positive; cytokeratin 7 (CK7) was negative (Figures 2 to 5). The patient underwent surgical excision of
the lesion twice, and histopathological examinations revealed, in both times, positive margins and infiltration of the hypodermis and of the
striated muscle. We opted for adjuvant radiotherapy in the ala of the nose with curative purpose, in linear accelerator with energy beam of
6 mV at a dose of 66 Gy (33 fractions of cGy per cycle) for two months. Five months later, the patient presented reappearance of the lesion,
whose biopsy demonstrated recurrence of cancer, and surgical treatment was indicated again. The intraoperative frozen section biopsy showed
lateral and deep margins and septal cartilage free of neoplastic involvement. Nasal reconstruction was made with paramedian flap and
cartilage grafting of the right ear shell. The histopathologic of the product of the nasal resection revealed persistence of the tumor on
the side surgical margins. Figure 1 Clinical aspect of the lesion: erythematous papule, slightly keratotic and ulcerated in the nasal dorsum
at the right Clinical aspect of the lesion: erythematous papule, slightly keratotic and ulcerated in the nasal dorsum at the right Figure 2
Histopathology revealed eccrine ductal carcinoma with squamous differentiation Histopathology revealed eccrine ductal carcinoma with
squamous differentiation Figure 3 Eccrine ductal carcinoma with squamous differentiation in higher increase Eccrine ductal carcinoma with
squamous differentiation in higher increase Figure 4 Immunohistochemistry reveals positivity for EMA Immunohistochemistry reveals positivity
for EMA Figure 5 Immunohistochemistry reveals positivity for CEA Immunohistochemistry reveals positivity for CEA Sweat gland carcinoma is an
unusual skin cancer that has no uniform classification, characteristic and behavior. The most common type is the EC, but it represents less
than 0.01% of all skin tumors.1,3,4 There are multiple types of EC, such as ductal EC, eccrine porocarcinoma, mucinous EC, clear cell
eccrine hidradenocarcinoma, adenoid cystic EC, digital papillary EC, microcystic adnexal carcinoma, eccrine spiroadenocarcinoma, malignant
mixed tumor and mucoepidermoid carcinoma.5 Ductal EC is the most common, and among its histologic variants are: a) ductal EC with abundant
fibromyxoid stroma; b) ductal EC with fusiform cells and myoepithelial differentiation; c) basaloid cells carcinoma; and d) SEDC,
characterized by squamous metaplasia.3 The latter variant is extremely rare. Typically it presents as a solitary dermal nodule, ulcerated or
not, in the head, neck, extremities or trunk of middle-aged or elderly individuals.1,2 There are reports of lesions with evolution of months
to 10 years before the initial biopsy. The largest reported tumor, so far, was 27 mm in diameter.3 Histologically it has an infiltrative and
poorly delimited growth pattern, extending deep to the dermis and hypodermis. There is prominent squamous differentiation, more apparent in
the upper region, where the neoplastic aggregates are larger and composed of epithelial cells with abundant cytoplasm amphiphile (Figure
6).1,3 Thus, when superficial biopsies are performed, the chances of incorrect initial diagnosis of SCC increase, as can be seen in almost
half of published cases.3 In the central and deep areas of the tumor, the neoplastic aggregates are basaloid, angulated, and display tubular
structures that resemble a benign syringoma (Figure 7). Atypical pleomorphic cells and mitotisis are present.3 Figure 6 Squamoid area of
cancer (HE, 400x) Squamoid area of cancer (HE, 400x) Figure 7 Area with ductal differentiation (HE, 400x) Area with ductal differentiation
(HE, 400x) The differential diagnosis includes SCC, metastatic carcinoma with squamous features and other adnexal eccrine carcinoma, such as
microcystic carcinoma and porocarcinoma with squamous differentiation.2 The EC immunohistochemical profile comprises positivity for S-100
protein, EMA, cytokeratin and CEA. In our case, there was positivity for EMA and CEA, which are typical of glandular tissue. CK7 also marks
this tissue. Combination of p63 and cytokeratin 5/6 is useful for differentiating primary cutaneous malignant disease, in which they are
positive for metastatic disease.1 The diagnosis of this cancer is challenging because of its rarity and superficiality of many biopsies.3
Differentiation between SEDC and other diseases is important for the proper managing of the case, since it has a more aggressive local
behavior, with a pattern of deep infiltrative growth, perineural and intravascular invasion and potential for recurrence,3,5,6
characteristic clearly demonstrated in this case. Up to 50% of ECs generate metastasis, while only 0.5% of SCCs do so.5 Limited information
on the treatment of SEDC occurs because of its rarity, however, the treatment of choice appears to be a wide surgical excision with clear
margins (whether or not using the Mohs technique).4,5 After two resections revealing compromised margins, our patient underwent radiotherapy
with curative intention. Wang, Handorf, Wu, Liu, Perlis, Galloway et al. in a recent review on surgery and adjuvant radiotherapy applied in
high risk carcinomas of the head and neck, as in this case, obtained excellent locoregional control with acceptable toxicity.7 In our case,
five months after the end of radiotherapy, the lesion reappeared. Due to the unavailability of surgery with Mohs technique, tumor excision
was performed with biopsy by intraoperative frozen section, which revealed free margins, not corroborated by histopathology of the resected
product, proving the more aggressive nature of this type of lesion. Frouin, Vignon-Pennamen, Balme, Cavelier-Balloy, Zimmermann, Ortonne et
al. conducted an anatomic clinical study of 30 cases of microcystic adnexal carcinoma, syringomatous carcinoma and SEDC. They concluded that
there were arguments for individualization of the latter entity due to its eccrine origin, its more aggressive behavior and the possibility
of its occurrence in transplanted organ.8 The evolution of published cases can be found in Table 1.1,3-6,9-13 So the SEDC is a rare
neoplasm, difficult to diagnose in the initial biopsy, especially if it is superficial. Its distinction from SCC is important because of its
aggressive nature and the need for surgical treatment with wide margins to avoid recurrence of lesion. Conflict of Interests: None Financial
Support: None Study conducted at Hospital do Servidor Público Estadual (HSPE) – São Paulo (SP), Brazil.
