Correspondence to Dr.　Yoshikuni Nagayama, ynaga1147@hotmail.co.jp Hemoglobin (Hb) Kansas is an inherited Hb variant with a low oxygen
affinity that is associated with low oxygen saturation on pulse oximetry (SpO2). It leads to asymptomatic cyanosis. Patients with Hb Kansas
do not require any specific treatment and the prognosis is good. In patients with unexplained cyanosis, we should thus consider Hb variants,
including Hb Kansas and avoid unnecessary investigations and managements. We herein report the case of 65-year-old woman with Hb Kansas and
review five other cases (three lineages) that have been reported in Japan. More than 1,000 Hb variants have been identified (1). Abnormal
oxygen saturation is not detected by pulse oximetry (SpO2) in the majority of Hb variants. However, some patients inherit an Hb variant with
a low oxygen affinity that displays low SpO2 and arterial oxygen saturation (SaO2) (2). Hb Kansas was first reported in 1961 as an Hb
variant that displays a very low oxygen affinity (3). The Hb molecule consists of two β-globin subunits and two α-globin subunits, which
maintain the equilibrium between the relaxed state (R), with a high oxygen affinity and the tense state (T), with a low oxygen affinity. Hb
Kansas has an AAC to ACC mutation at codon 102 of the β-globin gene, which results in an asparagine (Asn) to threonine (Thr) substitution.
The binding between β102 Asn and α 94 Asp (aspartic acid) is imperative for the stabilization of R; however, it is impossible for β102 Thr
to bind to α 94 Asp. The substitution pushes the equilibrium toward T (4,5). Thus, patients with Hb Kansas present cyanosis; however, they
are otherwise asymptomatic and do not require any specific treatment. A 65-year-old woman was referred to our hospital for renal
dysfunction. She had a history of hypertension and hypercholesterolemia. Seven days prior to her admission she had been diagnosed with a
facial herpes zoster infection, which was treated with valaciclovir and non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs. She subsequently experienced
a loss of appetite. There were no remarkable symptoms with the exception of cyanosis of the face, lips and nail beds. Her SpO2 was 70% on
room air, despite the SpO2 being tested using different oximeter probes on different fingers. Her complete blood counts were normal
(hemoglobin (Hb), 13.9 g/dL; hematocrit, 41.6%; mean corpuscular volume, 89.5 fL; reticulocyte count, 1.1%; white blood cell count, 5,160/μL
and platelet count 23.3×104/μL). There was no evidence of hemolysis. An arterial blood gas analysis (room air) showed that the arterial
partial pressure of oxygen (PaO2) was 88.7 mmHg, with an SaO2 value of 58.1%. Her carboxyhemoglobin and methemoglobin levels were both
negligible. A urinalysis showed a pH of 5.0, a specific gravity of 1.013, (±) protein and (±) blood (by dipstick), and negligible casts. The
urine sodium and creatinine concentrations were 21 mEq/L and 221 mg/dL, respectively. Moreover, the following values were observed: albumin,
4.4 g/dL; aspartate aminotransferase, 17 U/L; lactate dehydrogenase, 259 U/L; blood urea nitrogen, 39 mg/dL; creatinine, 3.0 mg/dL; uric
acid, 8.6 mg/dL; creatine kinase, 137 U/L; sodium, 140 mEq/L; potassium, 4.3 mEq/L; glucose, 128 mg/dL and C-reactive protein, 0.5 mg/dL.
Computed tomography revealed normal kidney conformation, no pneumonia and no pulmonary edema. Sufficient fluid replacement rapidly improved
her renal function, with her serum creatinine level reaching 0.74 mg/dL; after which the patient recovered. Her renal dysfunction was mainly
caused by pre-renal factors. However, her SpO2 value remained low. We investigated the cause of the unexpectedly low SpO2. Ultrasound
cardiography showed almost normal findings and no shunt flow. A respiratory functional test was also normal. We examined whether her SpO2
value improved when oxygen was administered in abundance. However, her SpO2 value remained at 78% under both 5 and 10 L oxygen by mask. On
the other hand, under 5 L oxygen, her PaO2 and SaO2 values were 230 mmHg and 77.4%, respectively. Thus, we suspected that the patient’s
condition involved an Hb variant with low oxygen affinity. In fact, the patient had looked pale since adolescence; however, she had no
critical symptoms. In addition, the patient’s mother also had asymptomatic cyanosis, but she had already died. The patient’s son did not
have cyanosis. The Hb screening test results were as follows (Table 1): both the percentage of HbF and HbA2 were normal; an isopropanol
test, which shows the presence of unstable Hb, was within the normal range; the glycerol lysis time was normal and an HbH inclusion body
test was negative (ruling out thalassemia); Hb electrophoresis (isoelectric focusing) revealed an abnormal band, at the approximate position
of HbA (Figure A). Finally, a DNA sequence analysis of the α- and β-globin genes revealed an AAC to ACC mutation at codon 102 of the
β-globin gene, resulting in asparagine to threonine substitution (Hb Kansas) (Figure B). Hemoglobin Screening Tests Results of the Present
Patient. A: Hb electrophoresis (isoelectric focusing) of the patient and a control. An abnormal band around the position of HbA was observed
in the patient (arrow). B: The direct DNA sequence analysis of the patient’s β-globin gene. An AAC to ACC mutation was observed at codon 102
of the β-globin gene. This resulted in an asparagine to threonine substitution. Generally, patients with low SpO2 and cyanosis may suffer
from some cardiopulmonary problems. However, Hb variants with a low oxygen affinity should be considered in patients with unexplained
cyanosis, if there is dissociation between PaO2 and SaO2 (or SpO2). These Hb variants, in which the alteration of the globin structure due
to a genetic mutation causes the low oxygen affinity of Hb, are very rare. An increase in the ratio of deoxidized Hb to oxidized Hb can lead
to cyanosis. Such patients are otherwise asymptomatic and display slightly decreased Hb levels. The oxygen dissociation curve of these
patients is shifted markedly to the right in comparison to healthy controls. The delivery of oxygen to peripheral tissues may be enhanced,
resulting in the reduction of erythropoietin-mediated erythropoiesis. In addition to Hb Kansas, Hb Beth Israel (6) and Hb Saint Mande (7)
are typical Hb variants which display a reduced oxygen affinity, and which lead to cyanosis. Since Ishiguro et al. reported the first case
of Hb Kansas in a Japanese family (8), six cases (four lineages), including the case of the present patient, have been reported in Japan
(8-10) (Table 2). Case nos. 1-2 and 3-5 (Table 2) were reported from Toyama (mid-west Japan) and Hokkaido (north of Japan) prefecture,
respectively. Our patient was from Hokkaido; thus, there were three lineages of Hb Kansas in Hokkaido. However, the relationships among the
families were unclear. The patients were diagnosed at various ages (9 to 65 years of age). All of the patients were diagnosed with Hb Kansas
based on investigations for asymptomatic cyanosis and family examinations. Hb Kansas patients do not require any specific treatments and
their prognosis is good; however patient No. 3 (Table 2) who had polycythemia and diabetes mellitus died due to a cerebral infarction. The
awareness of Hb variants will help ensure a timely diagnosis and avoid unnecessary investigations and managements. Clinical Data of Hb
Kansas Patients Reported in Japan. MCV: mean corpuscular volume, SpO2: oxygen saturation by pulse oximetry, SaO2: arterial oxygen
saturation, PaO2: arterial partial pressure of oxygen, ND: not described, DM: diabetes mellitus, HT: hypertension Note: SpO2, SaO2, and PaO2
were all measured under room air We thank Fumiya Takagi and Masafumi Kimoto (Fukuyama Medical Laboratory Co., Ltd.) for performing the Hb
analysis.
