Dyspigmentation along the Blaschko lines is strongly suggestive of a mosaic skin disorder. We report a 9-year-old male patient who presented
with swirls and streaks of both hypo and hyperpigmentation involving the entire body. Additionally, he had hypertrichosis, musculoskeletal
and minor neurodevelopment abnormalities but no intellectual disability. Cultured fibroblast displayed trisomy 7 mosaicism, which can
explain this pigmentary phenotype. Widespread dyspigmentation associated with involvement of other organs should prompt systemic examination
to detect additional anomalies and genetic evaluation should be considered, even with normal fetal karyotype. A 9-year-old male with
congenital widespread skin dyspigmentation presented with swirls and streaks of hypo and hyperpigmentation, sharply demarcated at the
midline on the anterior and posterior trunks (Figures 1 and 2). The patient also displayed hypertrichosis, dorsal scoliosis, mild
asymmetrical distortion of the skull, fine motor coordination disturbance and dysorthography. Figure 1 Swirls and streaks of both hypo and
hyperpigmentation on the anterior trunk and limbs Swirls and streaks of both hypo and hyperpigmentation on the anterior trunk and limbs
Figure 2 Hypo and hyperpigmentation, sharply demarcated at the midline on the posterior trunk, with associated hypertrichosis Hypo and
hyperpigmentation, sharply demarcated at the midline on the posterior trunk, with associated hypertrichosis Medical history revealed
amniocentesis performed due to a cystic hygroma in the first trimester of his gestation, which identified a normal karyotype (46,XY). Family
history was irrelevant with non-consanguineous parents. He was referred to the genetics clinic, where a cytogenetic study was conducted on
skin fibroblasts. We analyzed 100 metaphases of hyperpigmented skin (A) and 41 metaphases of hypopigmented skin (B). The results revealed
trisomy 7 mosaicism in 5% of the metaphases in both fragments [A: 47,XY,+7 and B: 47,XY,+7. Remaining ancillary exams showed no
abnormalities. The patient is currently being followed by neuropediatricians. Dyspigmentation along the Blaschko lines is often referred to
as hypomelanosis of Ito (HI) – hypopigmentation – or linear and whorled nevoid hypermelanosis (LWNH) – hyperpigmentation. Since it is
difficult to determine the baseline skin color, many authors now consider HI and LWNH under the broader concept of pigmentary mosaicism,
which can be caused by a wide variety of genetic defects.1 Specifically, mosaic autosomal trisomies are responsible for 30% of cases.2
Trisomy 7 mosaicism can explain pigmentary phenotype in our patient since chromosome 7 has several pigmentary genes (e.g. GPNMB; EGFR; HGF)3
and chromosomal abnormalities can disrupt their expression or function.3 Considering the 18 cases of postnatal diagnosis of trisomy 7
reported in the literature, 16 were mosaic and 9 of them presented with pigmentary mosaicism.4 Extracutaneous findings in trisomy 7
mosaicism included renal malformation, facial dysmorphism and growth retardation without a typical clinical presentation. In our case,
additional findings of hypertrichosis, musculoskeletal and minor neurodevelopment abnormalities were evident. Our patient also displayed a
normal fetal karyotype during amniocentesis, reflecting the difficulty of assessing chromosomal mosaicism during pregnancy. Problems include
the possibility of a sampling error and the difficulty to distinguish a pseudomosaicism resulting from a culture artefact (in 5% of
amniocentesis) of a true chromosomal mosaicism (observed in 0.2% of cases). 2 Postnatal karyotyping of at least two tissues may be necessary
for a correct diagnosis. Since mosaicism is not always evident in peripheral blood, the procedure is usually performed on fibroblasts from
both light and dark skin.5 Although there is no specific treatment for widespread dyspigmentation, a meticulous systemic examination should
be carried out to detect further abnormalities. Neurology referral and baseline ophthalmology evaluation are advisable to detect subtle
development delays or motor defects.6,7 Other subspecialty referrals should be individualized, as dictated by clinical findings. Genetic
evaluation, including karyotyping, should be considered in patients with widespread dyspigmentation associated with involvement of other
organs,6 even with normal fetal karyotype. Conflict of Interest: None Financial Support: None Work performed at the Dermatology Department -
Coimbra University Hospital Centre (CHUC) – Coimbra, Portugal.
