Scleromyxedema or lichen myxedematosus is a rare papular mucinosis of chronic and progressive course and unknown etiology. It is commonly
associated with monoclonal gammopathy and may show extracutaneous manifestations, affecting the heart, lung, kidney, and nerves. The
diagnosis is based on four criteria: generalized papular and sclerodermoid lesions; mucin deposition, fibroblast proliferation, and fibrosis
in the histopathology; monoclonal gammopathy; and no thyroid disorders. This article reports the case of a scleromyxedema patient with a
recent history of acute myocardial infarction and monoclonal gammopathy. A 51-year-old male presented with multiple papules that had been
present for one year. He reported difficulty moving his fingers and pain in his proximal interphalangeal articulation, which worsened with
heat. He had suffered an acute myocardial infarction one month before and was on treatment for dyslipidemia. Dermatological examination
showed whitish and normochromic millimetric papules on his neck, back, hands, feet, abdomen, and in the inguinal region (Figures 1 and 2).
In addition, his face and earlobes showed infiltration. Figure 1 Whitish and normochromic millimetric papules in the posterior cervical
region Whitish and normochromic millimetric papules in the posterior cervical region Figure 2 Whitish and normochromic millimetric papules
on the back of the right hand Whitish and normochromic millimetric papules on the back of the right hand Histopathology found revealed mucin
deposits and fibroblast proliferation in the reticular dermis, the hypodermis, and a mild perivascular lymphocytic infiltrate. The epidermis
was mildly acanthotic, and the basal layer was normal as well as the hypodermis (Figures 3 and 4). Figure 3 Characteristic triad: fusiform
cells (fibroblasts) in the superficial and mid layer of the dermis, fibrosis, and pronounced mucin deposition (HE) Characteristic triad:
fusiform cells (fibroblasts) in the superficial and mid layer of the dermis, fibrosis, and pronounced mucin deposition (HE) Figure 4 Mucin
deposition dissecting the dermal collagen fibers (colloidal iron) Mucin deposition dissecting the dermal collagen fibers (colloidal iron)
Protein electrophoresis showed a peak of gamma globulin of 21.8% (11.1% - 18.8%) and of beta-2 microglobulin at 2,095 ng/ml (normal values
up to 2,000 ng/ml). Other laboratory tests were unremarkable. Scleromyxedema or lichen myxedematosus (LM) is a rare type of papular
mucinosis, with a chronic and progressive course, chronic, progressive, of unknown etiology. It is commonly associated with monoclonal
paraproteinemia1-3 and is characterized by papular lesions associated with erythema and thick, diffuse scleroderma-like changes.2 The
normochromic or erythematous papules are stiff and grouped, ranging from 1 mm to 4 mm. They are symmetrically arranged, primarily on the
back of the hands and fingers, the extensor surface of the arms, the face, the upper torso, and the legs. Scalp and mucosae are not
affected.1,4 They may coalesce, resulting in widespread induration of the skin and eventually leading to leonine facies and microstomia.1,2
In some cases, LM may be associated with multiple myeloma, acute leukemia, and T-cell lymphoma.1 Extracutaneous manifestations include
dermato-neural syndrome, myopathy, inflammatory polyarthritis, esophageal disorders, changes in the larynx and nerves, pulmonary disease,
and heart and liver abnormalities.1,2 Cardiac abnormalities occur in 10% of cases, characterized by mucin deposition in the middle layer and
adventitia of the myocardial vessels, as well as mucinous degeneration of the atheromatous plaques of the arteries.5 Association with
systemic hypertension has also been reported.5 The diagnosis is based on four criteria: generalized papular and sclerodermoid lesions; mucin
deposition, fibroblast proliferation, and fibrosis in the histopathology; monoclonal gammopathy; and no thyroid disorders.6 The patient
showed all four criteria. Histological exam of the upper dermis shows a horizontal band of mucinous material between the round, stellate-
shaped and irregularly distributed collagen fibers and fusiform fibroblasts,1,2 as well as dermal fibrosis.3 Differential diagnoses include
systemic sclerosis, amyloidosis, scleredema, lichen nitidus, drug-related drug-related lichenoid eruptions, scleroderma, disseminated
syringoma, pityriasis rubra pilaris, leprosy, and lichen tuberculid.2,3 there is no established treatment.2 Alkylating agent melphalan was
considered a first-line treatment, but limited use due to its side effects.1-3 Other treatments described include cyclophosphamide,
intralesional infiltration of hyaluronidase and triamcinolone, CO 2 laser, methotrexate, cyclosporine, radiotherapy, thalidomide,
plasmapheresis, 2'-deoxyadenosine (2-CD), systemic corticoid, chloroquine, intravenous immunoglobulin, retinoids, chemotherapeutic agents,
and PUVA, but results may vary.1,7 Conflict of Interest: None Financial Support: None Work performed at the Ambulatório do Hospital
Universitário Evangélico de Curitiba – Faculdade Evangélica do Paraná (HUEC-Fepar) – Curitiba (PR), Brazil..
