Surgeons may be unaware of the ability of plant toxins to cause corneal damage. Therefore, corneal damage following intraocular surgery due
to plant toxins may be misdiagnosed as postoperative infection. A 74-year-old man presented with hyperemia and reduced visual acuity in both
eyes 6 weeks after uneventful cataract surgery. We observed extensive hyperemia and corneal stromal edema with Descemet’s folds in both
eyes. After obtaining a detailed patient history, we diagnosed plant toxin-induced corneal edema due to Asclepias physocarpa, which can
induce corneal edema by inhibiting the Na+/K+ ATPase activity of the corneal endothelium. Antimicrobial and steroid eye drops and an oral
steroid were prescribed accordingly. Symptons began to improve on day 3 and had almost completely resolved by day 6. At 1 month, the patient
had fully recovered without any sequelae. The correct diagnosis was possible in the present case as symptoms were bilateral and the patient
was able to report his potential exposure to plant toxins. However, if the symptoms had been unilateral and the patient had been unaware of
these toxins, he may have undergone unnecessary surgical interventions to treat non-existent postoperative endophthalmitis. Bacterial
endophthalmitis is a clinically significant condition that should be considered in patients complaining of vision loss accompanied by acute
extensive inflammation in the anterior segment of the eye within a few weeks of cataract surgery. Frequent examinations are generally
required in addition to antibiotic treatment, with emergency surgery often required. We experienced case of corneal edema accompanied by
extensive inflammation occurring 6 weeks after uneventful bilateral cataract surgery. In the present case, we successfully diagnosed plant
toxin-induced corneal edema by obtaining a detailed patient history and thereby avoiding unnecessary surgical interventions. A 74-year-old
man with no history of uveitis, keratitis, or allergic eye disease underwent uneventful bilateral cataract surgery with one day interval in
August 2015. His best corrected distant visual acuity (CDVA) following surgery was 1.0 and 1.2 in the right and left eyes, respectively
(Fig. 1). Intraocular pressures and the number of corneal endothelial cells (2301/mm2 in the right eye and 2171/mm2 in the left) were within
the normal range. The patient reported hyperemia and reduced visual acuity in both eyes one evening at 6 weeks postoperatively and visited
Maejima eye clinic the following day. On examination, extensive hyperemia and corneal stromal edema with Descemet’s folds were observed in
both eyes. His CDVA was 0.2 in both eyes, and central corneal thicknesses were 786 μm and 756 μm in the right and left eyes, respectively
(Fig. 2). Intraocular pressure measurements and detailed observations of the anterior chamber were not possible due to the presence of
corneal edema. We first suspected bacterial endophthalmitis; however, we considered this an atypical case due to the simultaneous
development of symptoms in both eyes 6 weeks postoperatively. No apparent vitreous opacity, retinal hemorrhage, or vasculitis was evident.
After obtaining a detailed patient history, it was apparent the patient had performed gardening work during the day of onset. The patient
had been engaged in the cultivation and sale of ornamental plants and had heard of eye toxicity on exposure to certain plants. We requested
the patient list the plants he had handled and conducted a literature search. His clinical symptoms were consistent with those reported for
corneal damage due to Asclepias physocarpa 1. We therefore diagnosed plant toxin-induced corneal edema accordingly. His eyes were initially
thoroughly rinsed with normal saline. Topical levofloxacin 1.5% (6 times/day) and bethamethasone 0.1% (6 times/day) were administered, and
he was re-evaluated daily on an outpatient basis. Small doses (10 mg) of oral steroids were added as the presence of retinal and vitreal
inflammation could not be completely excluded.Fig. 1Uneventful cataract surgeries were conducted in both eyes. CCT: central corneal
thickness, CDVA: corrected distant visual acuity Fig. 2Conjunctival injection and corneal edema with Descemet’s folds (day 1) Uneventful
cataract surgeries were conducted in both eyes. CCT: central corneal thickness, CDVA: corrected distant visual acuity Conjunctival injection
and corneal edema with Descemet’s folds (day 1) The next day, conjunctival injection and corneal edema had increased, and his CDVA had
decreased to 0.05 and 0.03 in the right and left eyes, respectively (Fig. 3). Corneal edema began to improve on day 3 and had almost
completely resolved by day 6. The oral steroid was ceased immediately after recovery of the visibility (day5).Fig. 3 a. Conjunctival
injection and severe corneal edema with Descemet’s folds (day 2). b. Anterior segment optical coherence tomography (SS-1000, TOMEY Inc,
Aichi, Japan). Central corneal thickness measurements were 829 μm and 845 μm for the right and left eyes, respectively (day 2). CCT: central
corneal thickness, CDVA: corrected distant visual acuity n. c: non corrigunt a. Conjunctival injection and severe corneal edema with
Descemet’s folds (day 2). b. Anterior segment optical coherence tomography (SS-1000, TOMEY Inc, Aichi, Japan). Central corneal thickness
measurements were 829 μm and 845 μm for the right and left eyes, respectively (day 2). CCT: central corneal thickness, CDVA: corrected
distant visual acuity n. c: non corrigunt On day 8, his CDVA had recovered to 1.0 in both eyes (Fig. 4). No clinical signs were evident at
1 month. The intraocular pressure and number of corneal endothelial cells (2171/mm2 in the right eye and 2247/mm2 in the left) were within
the normal range.Fig. 4 a. Almost complete resolution of conjunctival injection and corneal edema (day 8). b. Anterior segment optical
coherence tomography. Central corneal thickness measurements were normalized at 486 μm and 482 μm for the right and left eyes, respectively
(day 8). CCT: central corneal thickness, CDVA: corrected distant visual acuity a. Almost complete resolution of conjunctival injection and
corneal edema (day 8). b. Anterior segment optical coherence tomography. Central corneal thickness measurements were normalized at 486 μm
and 482 μm for the right and left eyes, respectively (day 8). CCT: central corneal thickness, CDVA: corrected distant visual acuity A.
physocarpa, commonly known as tropic and subtropic milkweed, is a plant species native to tropical America and belongs to the genus
Asclepias of the family Apocynaceae (Fig. 5). The plants of the Asclepias genus are widely distributed as horticultural or ornamental plants
in Japan and other countries, and latex from their stems has been shown to contain toxic components termed cardenolides. To our knowledge,
only a few cases of cardiolides toxicity have been previously reported , and general ophthalmologists are unaware of these plants. In
corneal endothelial cells, the Na+/K+ ATPase actively transports Na+ from inside of the cells into the anterior chamber to create an osmotic
pressure gradient; thereby resulting in the active transport of water from inside the corneal stroma to the anterior chamber. The corneal
stromal edema obsereved in the present case was attributable to corneal endothelial dysfunction caused by suppression of the Na+ active
transport by cardenolides in the stem latex, thereby inhibiting the Na+/K+ ATPase .Fig. 5 a. Flower and leaves of Asclepias physocarpa. b.
Follicle of A. physocarpa a. Flower and leaves of Asclepias physocarpa. b. Follicle of A. physocarpa Chakraborty et al. reported a case of
A. curassavica exposure in which the patient rapidly attained remission with the use of artificial tear eye drops only . Amiran et al.
reported a case of A. fruticosa exposure in which the clinical signs showed marked rapid improvement after the use of 0.1% topical
dexamethasone . Pina et al. reported a case of A. physocarpa exposure in which almost complete resolution was obtained using topical
dexamethasone, ofloxacin, and artificial tears. Pina et al. suggested the possibility of abnormal endothelial morphology as a sequelae at
6 months follow-up, although the cell count was within the normal range (2119 cells/mm2). The use of topical steroids may increase the
activity of the Na+/K+ pump in corneal endothelial cells and thus have utility in the treatment of plant-induced corneal edema. Therefore,
we modelled our treatment on the approach reported by Pina et al. , with the patient almost completely recovering within 6 days. Our patient
fully recovered without any sequelae including any damage to corneal endothelial cells. Few plants such as those in the genus Asclepias have
been reported to cause corneal damage. In a report of 7 cases of eye damage caused by Euphorbia plants, aggressive antibacterial and anti-
inflammatory treatments were considered necessary as the patients presented with defects in the corneal epithelium and stromal edema,
iritis, and other symptoms; with one case ultimately leading to blindness . In a report on 29 cases of eye damage due to Calotropis procera,
the patients recovered within 3–14 days with maintenance of corneal transparency. Although visual acuity also recovered satisfactorily in
the majority cases, endothelial cell counts were decreased in 74% of these cases. Epithelial defects, iritis, and increased ocular pressure
were observed in 10, 31, and 24% of cases, respectively . In the present case, the patient did not remember any direct entry of latex into
his eyes. As in the present case, corneal damage may be caused by contact between the eyes and hands that have been contaminated with latex,
even without direct entry of latex droplets into the eyes. Therefore, physicians should proactively determine the involvement of plant
toxins and conduct a detailed patient interview in such cases. Although plants of the genus Asclepias are widely distributed, the number of
the reports of ophthalmic disease due to plant toxins is surprisingly low. This may be attributable to the unfamiliarity of ophthalmologists
to plant-based toxicity. In the present case, the correct diagnosis was possible as symptoms were bilateral and the patient could report his
exposure to plant toxins. However, if the symptoms had been unilateral or developed more immediately postoperatively, or if the patient had
been unaware of plant toxins, he may have undergone unnecessary surgical interventions. Although plant toxin-induced corneal damage is
rarely encountered, all surgeons should be aware of this significant clinical condition. Corrected distant visual acuity Not applicable
There was no funding support. All data supporting our findings are contained within the manuscript. KM and YI carried out the writing of the
manuscript. SH and YT participated in the collection and interpretation of data. KM and YI carried out critical revision and correction of
the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. The authors declare that they have no competing interests. Written
informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this case report accompanying images. A copy of written consent is
available for review by the Editor of this journal. The present case report was approved by the ethics committee of Nojima hospital.
