Disulfiram is the commonly prescribed drug for the treatment of alcohol dependence. It’s major metabolite (diethyldithiocarbamate) is an
inhibitor of dopamine-betahydroxylase, an enzyme that catalyzes the metabolism of dopamine to norepinephrine resulting in psychosis. We
recommend that disulfiram should be used at the lowest effective dose, possibly 250 mg daily and caution should be taken while prescribing
disulfiram for patients with personal and familial antecedents of psychosis. For the past 50 years disulfiram is the commonly prescribed
drug for the treatment of alcohol dependence. Important side effects of disulfiram are hepatological, dermatological, neurological
(polyneuritis, encephalopathy)1,2) and psychiatric in nature. Psychiatric manifestations include confusion, loss of memory, psychosis,3–6)
mania with psychotic symptoms.7,8) Disulfiram’s major metabolite diethyldithiocarbamate is an inhibitor of dopamine-betahydroxylase (DBH),
an enzyme that catalyzes the metabolism of dopamine (DA) to norepinephrine (NE).9) By inhibiting this metabolic pathway from DA to NE in the
central nervous system, disulfiram results in an increase of DA concentrations in mesolimbic system resulting in psychosis. Alcoholics who
developed psychotic symptoms during disulfiram treatment are found to have low levels of amine and monoamine oxidase, suggesting DBH
blockage.10) We present a case of 32-year-old male who developed psychosis with the use of disulfiram. A 32-year-old male without past of
psychiatric and neurological illness reported to psychiatry outpatient department with complaint of daily alcohol intake of 250–750 ml (40%
alcohol by volume) for the last 5 years. With the informed consent of the patient, disulfiram was administered at the dosage of 250 mg twice
daily for 1 month, while the patient abstained from alcohol. Then the patient presented complaint of fearfulness, suspiciousness, easy
irritability, muttering to self, decreased sleep for last one month. Detailed medical evaluation revealed no significant findings.
Haematological and biochemical indices were within normal limits. On mental status examination delusion of persecution and auditory
hallucinations were elicited. He has family history of schizophrenia and comorbid alcohol dependence in his father. The patient has no
history of any other substance abuse. The patient was hospitalised and possibility of psychosis induced by disulfiram was kept. Disulfiram
was stopped. Symptoms of alcohol withdrawal and disulfiram-alcohol reactions were not observed during hospitalization. He was started on
tablet lorazepam 4 mg per day. His fearfulness, suspiciousness, irritability, muttering to self and impaired sleep gradually improved over a
period of 10 days. After 2 weeks he improved completely and lorazepam was stopped. Risk factors for development of disulfiram related
psychotic symptoms include past history or family history of psychosis, overly rapid increase in dosage or greater than recommended total
dosage, old age, impaired liver function and concurrent dopaminergic medications or psycho-stimulant abuse.5,11) Our patient has family
history of schizophrenia in his father. His psychotic symptoms improved after stoppage of disulfiram and use of lorazepam tablet only
without any additional requirement of anti-psychotic treatment. These factors support the association between with disulfiram use and
emergence of psychotic symptoms in our patient. The usual recommended initial dosage is 500 mg per day for the first 1 or 2 weeks, followed
by a maintenance dosage of 250 mg per day.12) Disulfiram related psychosis usually involve either therapeutic or higher than recommended
dosages.13) Our patient has developed psychotic symptoms with 500 mg per day of disulfiram. We recommend that disulfiram should be used at
the lowest effective dose, possibly 250 mg daily. Our case highlights the relevance of a careful history of patient’s symptoms and family
history that should be performed before starting treatment with disulfiram and caution should be taken while prescribing disulfiram for
patients with personal and familial antecedents of psychosis. Disulfiram-related psychiatric complications are reported to be more prevalent
in eastern countries,3) which suggests that genetic factors may play a role in disulfiram induced psychosis.
