Supplemental Digital Content is available in the text Dextrocardia, or right-lying heart, is an uncommon congenital heart disease in which
the apex of the heart is located on the right side of chest. Persistent left superior vena cava (PLSVA) is a rare venous anomaly that is
often associated with the abnormalities of cardiac transduction system. A case with combination of dextrocardia, persistent left superior
vena cava, and sick sinus syndrome has not been reported. We used different techniques including cardiac color Doppler echocardiography,
24-hour Holter monitoring, and abdominal ultrasound to make a diagnosis and treated the patient by implanting a VVI pacemaker. A 50-year-old
woman was admitted with a syncope. Angiography of the right atrium and superior vena cava, echocardiography, electrocardiography, and
abdominal ultrasound revealed the presence of the combination of mirror image dextrocardia, PLSVA, and sick sinus syndrome. The complex
structural anomalies presented great technical challenges for interventional treatments. After thorough examination and understanding of the
structural anatomy and anomalies of the superior and inferior vena cava and cardiac chambers, we successfully treated this patient by
implanting a VVI pacemaker. Physicians must be aware of the complexity of the morphological and anatomical structures of dextrocardia
accompanying PLSVC. Given that the diagnosis of situs inversus was performed at a relatively advanced age, it is therefore important to make
such a correct diagnosis followed by appropriate therapeutic intervention. Dextrocardia, that is right-lying heart, is a rare congenital
heart defect in which the heart is predominantly localized on the right side of the thorax. The reported incidence of dextrocardia is 1 in
10,000 live births, and it accounts for 0.5% of cases of adult congenital heart disease. Mirror image dextrocardia, which is the most common
subtype of dextrocardia, is often associated with other structural malformations. Persistent left superior vena cava (PLSVC) is also rare
but is the most common systemic venous anomaly, with a reported incidence of 0.5% in the general population and accounting for 3% to 10% of
cases of congenital heart defects. Cases of dextrocardia in combination with a PLSVC are extremely rare but have been previously reported
and/or successfully treated. For example, Yener et al described a case of dextrocardia with PLSVC and a ventricular septal defect. Wan et al
successfully treated a patient with dextrocardia, PLSVC, and ventricular tachycardia with a wearable defibrillator. Pott et al also
successfully implanted a biventricular pacemaker in a patient with the combination of dextrocardia, PLSVC, and idiopathic dilated
cardiomyopathy. Here, we present a rare case of dextrocardia and PLSVC (the right superior vena cava was normal) accompanied by sick sinus
syndrome. This patient had a complicated venous anomaly, which posed a tremendous challenge for the completion of cardiac invasive
procedures. We successfully treated this patient by implanting a VVI pacemaker. No similar case has been reported previously. We obtained
approval from the Ethics Committee of Jilin University and a signed consent form from the patient for reporting this case. A 50-year-old
female patient was admitted to our hospital because of a syncope 30 minutes ago and complaint of palpitations and malaise lasting for 1
year. Approximately 1 year before admission, the patient had started having palpitations and malaise, and a number of ECG examinations
revealed sinus bradycardia with a heart rate of ∼45 beats per min (bpm) (Supplemental Fig. 1). At admission, physical examination showed a
blood pressure of 150/80 mmHg, equal-sized pupils, and a heart rate of 43 bpm, and that apex beating was found in the right fifth
intercostal space approximately 0.5 cm from the midclavicular line with no murmurs heard. Head computed tomography results were normal. ECG
examination revealed that the morphology of waves in leads avR and avL were opposite to the normal, inverted P, QRS, and T waves in lead I,
and that the graphics of the right-sided chest leads were similar to those of the left-sided ones. Cardiac color Doppler echocardiography
examination revealed mirror-image dextrocardia. Twenty-four-hour Holter monitoring showed an average heart rate of 47 bpm, the longest PP
interval of 3.31 seconds, nodal escape beats, and paroxysmal atrial fibrillation. Abdominal ultrasound examination revealed the liver and
gallbladder were located on the left side and the spleen on the right. Based on the above examinations and clinical manifestations, we
diagnosed this patient as having mirror image dextrocardia and sick sinus syndrome and designed the following surgical strategy to implant a
ventricular pacemaker. Under local anesthesia, an insertion site was chosen on the right subclavian vein (because of dextrocardia, it was
symmetrical with the conventional insertion site), and the guide wire was passed through the subclavian vein and superior vena cava. We
expected that the guide wire would eventually reach the right ventricle. However, during the procedure, we found that the superior vena cava
was very tortuous in its course and that the guide wire did not travel smoothly within the vessels and failed to reach the right ventricle.
We therefore considered the existence of severe vascular malformations and aborted this attempt. To determine the possibility of the
presence of vascular malformation, we performed right heart catheterization and venography through the femur and found a severe malformation
of the inferior vena cava, in which the inferior vena cava did not directly drain into the right atrium from the bottom; instead, it formed
an inverted U-shape and drained into the right atrium from the top (Fig. 1). Consistent with the diagnosis of dextrocardia, we found that
the right atrium was located on the lower left section of the heart (Fig. 2), and that the right ventricle was located on the lower right
section of the heart (Fig. 3). In addition, venography revealed that the right-sided superior vena cava also ran an abnormal, tortuous path
(Fig. 4). Angiography of the inferior vena cava revealed the malformation of inferior vena cava: inverted U-shape of inferior vena cava
draining into the right atrium from the upper portion of the heart. Right atrial angiography revealed the entrance of the catheter from the
malformed inferior vena cava into the right atrium. Angiographic image of the right ventricle. An inferior vena cava (IVC) catheter ran
through the malformed inferior vena cava, right atrium, and tricuspid valve and entered the right ventricle. Angiographic image of the right
superior vena cava. An inferior vena cava (IVC) catheter ran through the malformed inferior vena cava and right atrium and entered the right
superior vena cava. After reviewing the angiographic images, we acknowledged that this patient had severe venous malformations and did not
expect it would be possible to place the ventricle electrode via the right subclavian vein. To further understand the structural
malformations of these veins and design a better approach for treatment, we once again performed a left subclavian venography and found the
presence of PLSVA, in which the left superior vena cava directly drained into the right atrium via the coronary sinus (Figs. 5 and 6). Image
of the left superior vena cava obtained from atrial angiography performed via the left subclavian vein. Angiographic image showing the
drainage of the left superior vena cava into the right atrium. After analysis of the angiographic results, we concluded that this patient
had dextrocardia, PLSVA, and sick sinus syndrome. After obtaining a thorough understanding of the venous anatomy and anomalies of this
patient, we successfully implanted a pacemaker lead in a proper location in the right ventricle through the left subclavian vein. The
implanted VVI pacemaker had a pacing threshold of 0.6 V, impedance of 680 ohm, and ventricular sensing of 6.5 mV. Chest X-ray showed correct
placement of the ventricular lead in the right ventricle (Fig. 7), and ECG after the treatment was normal (Supplemental Fig. 2). Chest X-ray
demonstrating the correct placement of the VVI pacemaker. Dextrocardia is clinically characterized into 3 subgroups based on the position of
heart chambers and abdominal organs. First is dextroversion (situs solitus or false dextrocardia): the heart is on the right side of the
chest with the apex pointing to the right of the body. Dextroversion is often accompanied by other intracardiac anomalies and mainly caused
by the positional shift and rotation of the right heart. Second one is dextroposition (situs ambiguous or isomerism): only the heart is on
the opposite location but the other visceral organs are appropriately positioned. Dextroposition usually occurs when the anatomical
abnormalities of lung, pleura, and/or diaphragm “push” the heart to the right side of the chest. Third is dextrocardia (situs inversus or
mirror image dextrocardia): the anterior-posterior relationships of the different parts of the heart are normal, but the right-to-left
orientation is reversed. Mirror image dextrocardia is the most common form of right-lying heart and is associated with different degrees of
visceral transposition (i.e., situs inversus). The patient reported in this case was diagnosed with mirror-image dextrocardia. PLSVC is also
an uncommon congenital anomaly and may occur in isolation or in combination with other cardiac or vascular malformations. Based on the
venous drainage sites, PLSVC may be classified into 4 types: type I, PLSVC drains into the right atrium through the coronary sinus; type II,
PLSVC drains into the right atrium through the coronary sinus but has a connection with the left atrium, thus generating the right to left
shunt; type III, PLSVC directly drains into the left atrium, resulting in a right to left shunt; and type IV, PLSVC is directly connected to
the left pulmonary vein. Among these types of PLSVC, type I accounts for nearly 90% of all PLSVC cases. Although type I PLSVC usually does
not have any significant hemodynamic consequences, a large amount of blood flows back to the atria through the coronary sinus vein and may
subsequently dilate the sinus ostium, particularly in the absence of the right superior vena cava. Because the origins of the sinus node,
atrioventricular node, and His-bundle are structurally close to the junction of the main veins and the coronary sinus, the incidence of
arrhythmias in patients with PLSVC is also higher. The patient reported here had a type I PLSVC in combination with sick sinus syndrome.
Clinically, mirror-image dextrocardia in combination with PLSVC is extremely rare. A search of the Pubmed database using key words
“dextrocadia,” and “persistent left superior vena cava” generated only a few publications, and another search of the same database using key
words “dextrocadia,” “persistent left superior vena cava,” and “sick sinus syndrome” produced zero citations. To the best of our knowledge,
we are the first to report a case of successful implantation of a VVI pacemaker via a malformed left superior vena cava in a patient with
mirror-image dextrocardia combined with PLSVC and sick sinus syndrome. The complex anatomical structures and rare combination of
dextrocardia and PLSVC posed great challenges for the surgical intervention. In this particular case, the major challenge was determining
how to smoothly guide the electrode into the right ventricle via tricuspid valve. To achieve this goal, we performed angiography of the
right atrium and right ventricle and precisely determined the positions of the right atrium, right ventricle, and tricuspid valve. We also
performed venography to accurately identify the venous malformations. After obtaining a thorough knowledge of the structural malformations,
we appropriately adjusted the plasticity of the guidewire and safely passed the electrode through the tricuspid valve, which was finally
anchored in the correct position within the right ventricle. Given the severe inferior vena cava malformation and complex positions of atria
and ventricles of this patient, it would be difficult for a temporary pacemaker to reach its designated site. This patient had an uneventful
recovery after surgery. In conclusion, we report here a rare case of dextrocardia combined with PLSVC and sick sinus syndrome, which was
successfully treated with the implantation of a VI pacemaker after thorough examination and understanding of the structural anatomy and
abnormalities of the veins and heart chambers. We are publishing this case to share our clinical experience for use in the diagnosis and
treatment of similar cases in the field. It has to be pointed out that there is no criterion standard to follow in treating patients who
bear dextrocardia with PLSVC. Physicians must be aware of the complexity of the morphological and anatomical structures of dextrocardia
accompanying PLSVC, and a lack of knowledge may render additional difficulty with therapeutic interventions and pose serious risks. In
addition, we can maximally diminish the risk of complications and improve the success rate of cardiac invasive approaches only after we
fully control therapeutic techniques and their respective appropriate applications. Abbreviations: ECG = Electrocardiography, PLSVA =
Persistent left superior vena cava. The authors report no conflicts of interest. Supplemental Digital Content is available for this article.
