Dieulafoy disease is characterized by the presence of dilated, tortuous arteries that project into the submucosa of the gastrointestinal
tract and less frequently the bronchus. Dieulafoy disease of the trachea has not been previously described. A 60-year-old woman with
recurrent episodes of massive hemoptysis. Dieulafoy disease of the trachea. :Selective arterial embolization was undertaken. The
intervention was successful and no fresh episode of acute hemoptysis was observed. Apart from the bronchus, vascular anomaly may also be
present in the trachea in Dieulafoy disease. Dieulafoy disease is noted for a vascular anomaly characterized by the presence of dilated,
tortuous arteries that project into the submucosa of the gastrointestinal tract. Dieulafoy disease of the bronchus was subsequently reported
in patients with unexplained massive hemoptysis and hitherto a total of 47 cases of Dieulafoy disease of the bronchus have been described.
Dieulafoy disease of the bronchus is considered a congenital anomaly and it is speculated that the disease arises from a failure of caliber-
persistent artery running within the submucosa to differentiate into capillaries. The dilated tortuous arteries in the submucosa originate
from the bronchial artery and pulmonary artery and are vulnerable to bleeding. Dieulafoy disease of the trachea has not been previously
described. Herein, we report the first case of Dieulafoy disease of the trachea in a 60-year-old woman with recurrent episodes of massive
hemoptysis. The condition was diagnosed by bronchoscopy and computed tomography (CT) angiography and successfully managed by selective
arterial embolization. A 60-year-old woman patient was admitted to our hospital on Feb. 18, 2016 because of frequent episodes of hemoptysis
for 2 weeks. In the previous decade, the patient had frequent but less severe episodes of hemoptysis, which typically ensued following an
upper respiratory tract infection. Ear, nose, and throat examination and laryngoscope failed to identify an apparent source of bleeding. CT
chest scan revealed no abnormality. The most recent episode occurred after an upper respiratory tract infection 2 weeks ago. The patient
coughed up as much as about 500 mL of fresh blood in an episode of hemoptysis, which was alleviated by anti-tussive therapy. The patient
denied a history of smoking and illicit drug use. Diagnostic workup revealed no evidence of coagulopathy. Upon admission, physical
examination revealed signs of rhonchi and reduced breath sounds. Bronchoscopy showed a 1-cm lesion at the membranous trachea 2 cm to the
carina. Tortuous blood vessels were observed running in the submucosa of the trachea (Fig. 1). CT angiography was performed, demonstrating
an artery extending into the submucosa from the descending aorta (Fig. 2). A diagnosis of Dieulafoy disease of the trachea was entertained.
Since the blood vessel was considered to be the culprit of hemoptysis, selective arterial embolization was performed 1 week later. No fresh
episode of acute hemoptysis was observed and the patient was still being followed up at the time of writing this report. Bronchoscopy in a
60-year-old woman patient with Dieulafoy disease shows a 1-cm lesion at the membranous trachea 2 cm to the carina. Tortuous blood vessels
are observed running in the submucosa of the trachea. Computed tomography (CT) angiography demonstrates an artery extending into the
submucosa from the descending aorta. Arrowhead indicates the submucosa vessel. This study was approved by Ethics Committee of Shanghai Jiao
Tong University Affiliated Sixth People's Hospital, and also got an informed written consent from the patient. Dieulafoy disease of the
bronchus was first reported by Sweerts et al in 1995 in 2 patients with unexplained massive hemoptysis, approximately 100 years after the
first description of the condition in the stomach by the French surgeon Georges Dieulafoy in 1898 following his study of fatal gastric
haemorrhage in 3 asymptomatic young men. Dieulafoy disease of the bronchus, though considered rare, may have higher occurrences because the
condition is underappreciated and underdiagnosed. Over the past decade, Dieulafoy disease of the bronchus has been increasingly recognized
as a cause of pulmonary hemorrhage. Parrot et al reported a series of 7 patients with Dieulafoy disease of the bronchus. These patients were
all current heavy smokers and experienced massive and unexplained episodes of recurrent hemoptysis. Yang et al reported 3 cases of bronchial
Dieulafoy disease and reviewed 19 additional cases from the literature. These patients typically developed sudden onset of massive
hemoptysis. Dieulafoy disease of the bronchus remains a difficult disease to detect to the small size of the nodular lesion within the lumen
of the bronchus, which may be covered with coagulum. Our patient had a 10-year history of recurrent massive hemoptysis without a definite
diagnosis. Bronchoscopy demonstrated tortuous blood vessels running in the submucosa of the trachea. Dieulafoy disease of the trachea was
further established by vascular imaging with CT angiography. We did not perform bronchoscopic biopsy as it entails the risk of triggering
sudden massive hemoptysis. van der Werf et al reported that bronchoscopic biopsy triggered fatal massive bleeding in a 70-year-old woman
with Dieulafoy disease of the bronchus. Literature reviewed by Yang et al also showed that biopsy injury often caused massive or lethal
hemoptysis. The anomalous arteries in Dieulafoy disease of the bronchus may originate from the bronchial artery or less commonly from the
pulmonary artery. Yang et al reported that in those patients with a known source of the anomalous artery, 82% (9/11) were from the bronchial
artery and 18% (1/11) were from the pulmonary artery while in half of the cases (11/22) the originating artery could not be determined. In
another review of 17 cases of Dieulafoy disease of the bronchus, the authors also found that in those patients with a known source of the
anomalous artery, 75% (9/12) were from the bronchial artery and 25% (3/12) were from the pulmonary artery. Our CT angiography demonstrated
that the anomalous artery originated from the descending aorta. Selective bronchial artery embolization is recommended of the culprit vessel
in Dieulafoy disease of the bronchus. We also carried out successful selective arterial embolization and to date no recurrent episode of
hemoptysis has been observed in the patient. In conclusion, our current case suggests that Dieulafoy disease may also occur in the trachea.
Dieulafoy disease of the respiratory tree should be considered in patients with recurrent massive hemoptysis. Vascular imaging by CT
angiography may be used to diagnose the condition and selective arterial embolization may be promptly instituted to avoid lethal massive
hemoptysis. Abbreviation: CT = computed tomography. The authors report no conflicts of interest.
