Total anomalous pulmonary venous connection is an uncommon congenital heart disease. Four types are described based on the site of pulmonary
venous drainage: supracardiac, cardiac, infradiaphragmathic, and mixed connection. In most cases of supracardiac type, the common venous
confluence drains through an ascending left vertical vein into the brachiocephalic vein, right superior vena cava, and then into the right
atrium. Anomalous connection of the pulmonary venous confluence directly to the right SVC, especially the obstructed form is an unusual and
severe supracardiac variant. The prenatal diagnosis is challenging. We present a case report of a fetus diagnosed with TAPVC at 23
gestational weeks. The 4-chamber view showed a small left atrium, with a “smooth” posterior wall and the absence of pulmonary vein
connection. This is the first case of prenatally diagnosed isolated, obstructed supracardiac type with drainage directly into the right
superior vena cava. The obstetrician and fetal cardiologist should be cautious at the direct and indirect echocardiographic signs of this
condition. A prenatal diagnose of isolated, obstructed form is important for adequate planning of delivery and postnatal surgery in a
tertiary center. Total anomalous pulmonary venous connection (TAPVC) is an uncommon congenital heart disease, with an incidence of about 0.6
to 1.2/10.000 live birth and accounting for about 0.7 to 1.5% of all cardiac defects. TAPVC is a result of the nonfusion of the confluence
of the pulmonary venous drainage and the left atrium. It is often associated with complex cardiac lesions. The prenatal diagnosis of
isolated form of TAPVC is challenging. Darling described 4 types of TAPVC based on the site of pulmonary venous drainage: supracardiac (type
I), cardiac (type II), infradiaphragmathic (type III), and mixed connection (type IV). In most cases of supracardiac TAPVC, there is an
anomalous connection of the common venous confluence with a persistent left superior vena cava (SVC), also named ascending left vertical
vein, which further drains into the brachiocephalic vein, right SVC, and then into the right atrium. The connection of the pulmonary venous
confluence directly into the right SVC is an uncommon condition. The symptoms of TAPVC vary from mild cyanosis to severe cyanosis,
respiratory distress, and acidosis even in the first hours of life. These symptoms depend mostly on the degree of venous obstruction;
therefore, the symptoms will increase in severity at the same time with the degree of venous obstruction. The supracardiac type of TAPVC
will present pulmonary venous obstruction less frequently than the infracardiac type. The obstructive forms of TAPVC present more rapidly
respiratory disorders, hypoxia, pulmonary hypertension, even cardio-respiratory failure, and distress-syndrome-like pattern. The
2-dimensional echocardiography is the one that usually establishes the diagnosis of this rare cardiac congenital condition. Obstructive
TAPVC is a congenital condition that requires emergency surgical intervention. Other therapeutic measures, such as atrial septostomy, can be
performed by cardiac catheterization. The surgical treatment consists in ligaturation of the vertical vein in order to prevent the residual
left-to-right shunt. Heritable cases of TAPVC have also been described in the literature; therefore, the physician must always take into
consideration the referral of the family for genetic assessment and advice. We hereby present an intrauterine diagnosed case of isolated,
obstructed supracardiac TAPVC. The informed consent was given by the patient's parents (legal guardians) for publication of this case
report. A 26-year-old primigravid woman, without relevant history, was referred for fetal echocardiography at 26 weeks of gestation, after
the second trimester fetal echocardiography screening revealed TAPVC in the fetus. Cardiac examination was carried out by a pediatric
cardiologist and a gynecologist with experience in fetal echocardiography. Echocardiography was performed transabdominally. The 4-chamber
view revealed a right-to-left chamber discrepancy, a small left atrium, with a “smooth” posterior wall. Also, the 2D image raised the
suspicion of absent pulmonary vein connection (Fig. 1). Low-flow color mapping identified pulmonary veins draining into a common confluence
behind the small left atrium. Three vessel-trachea (3VT) view revealed a dilated right SVC, with normal innominate vein. No vertical vein
was detected on 3 vessel (3 V) or 3VT view (Fig. 2). Low-flow color Doppler imaging revealed a turbulent flow in right SVC at the drainage
site of the common confluence (Fig. 3). On further assessment, a very narrow opening of the confluence into the right SVC was detected (Fig.
4). No other cardiac anomaly was detected. Prenatal echocardiography. 4C view. Small left atrium with a “smooth” posterior wall. A common
venous confluence behind the left atrium. 4C view = 4 chamber view, CC = common venous confluence, LA = left atrium, SVC = superior vena
cava. Prenatal echocardiography. A 3 vessel trachea view (3VTV) with color Doppler flow mapping. Dilated superior vena cava (SVC) with
turbulent flow. 3VTV = 3 vessel trachea view, Ao arch = aortic arch, Duct art. = ductus arteriosus, SVC = superior vena cava. Prenatal
echocardiography – The high mediastinal view. Dilated superior vena cava due to drainage of the common venous confluence. BCV =
brachiocephalic vein, SVC = superior vena cava. Prenatal echocardiography. Oblique bicav view. Dilated SVC due to the drainage of the common
venous confluence through a narrow opening. CC = common venous confluence, IVC = inferior vena cava, RA = right atrium, SVC = superior vena
cava. At 38 weeks of gestation, a male neonate was born in a tertiary cardiovascular Center by cesarean section due to cephalous-pelvic
disproportion. His birth weight was 3700 g, length was 57 cm, and head girth was 34 cm. The Apgar score at 1 and 5 minutes after birth was 8
and 9, respectively. He presented cyanosis, with tachypnea, a respiratory rate of 60 to 70 breath/min, suprasternal and subcostal
retractions. The pulse oximeter showed 73% to 82% of room air oxygen saturation. Cross-sectional echocardiographic examination performed 1
hour after birth confirmed the prenatal diagnosis. This revealed an enlarged right heart (atrium and ventricle) and ostium secundum type
atrial septal defect of 6 mm, with right-to-left shunt. The 4 pulmonary veins drained into a common confluence localized behind the left
atrium, which opened directly into the right SVC, without an ascending vertical vein. The color flow mapping of the confluence opening into
the right SVC showed a critical obstruction (Fig. 5). Pulsed Doppler evaluation of the pulmonary venous confluence opening into the superior
vena cava showed a maximal velocity of 21 cm/s and maximal gradient of 18 mm Hg, suggesting obstruction at that level (Fig. 6). The chest
radiography revealed signs of increasing pulmonary venous congestion. Two hours after birth the patient was transferred to the neonatal
intensive care unit. A computer tomography angiography was performed, which revealed similar findings (Figs. 7 and 8). Postnatal
echocardiography. (A) 2D image. Suprasternal oblique incidence. The common confluence of the pulmonary veins drained directly into the right
SVC. The opening is very narrow (0.23 cm). (B) Color-Doppler flow mapping of the confluence opening into the right SVC showed a high
turbulence suggestive for critical obstruction. 2D = bi-dimensional, Ao = aorta, CC = common venous confluence, PA = pulmonary artery, SVC =
superior vena cava. Postnatal echocardiography. Pulsed Doppler evaluation of the pulmonary venous confluence opening into the SVC showed a
maximal velocity of 21 cm/s and maximal gradient of 18 mm Hg, suggesting obstruction at that level. SVC = superior vena cava. AngioCT of the
heart (3D reconstruction). Common confluence of the 4 pulmonary veins, opening directly into the right SVC: AngioCT = computer tomography
angiography, CC = common venous confluence, SVC = superior vena cava, v = pulmonary veins, ∗ drainage site of the common venous confluence
into the SVC. AngioCT of the heart. Common pulmonary venous confluence opening into the right SVC: AngioCT = computer tomography
angiography, CC = common pulmonary venous confluence, SVC = superior vena cava, ∗ drainage site of the common venous confluence into the
SVC. The neonate underwent an emergency open heart surgery by performing a side-to-side anastomosis between the pulmonary venous confluence
and left atrium. The connection of the confluence with the SVC was ligated. The postoperative recovery was complicated by pulmonary arterial
hypertension, right ventricular myocardial dysfunction with hemodynamic failure, and unfortunately the newborn died 3 days after surgery.
Anomalous connection of the pulmonary venous confluence directly to the right SVC, especially the obstructed form is an unusual supracardiac
variant. In a retrospective, collaborative study involving 19 pediatric cardiac centers from the United Kingdom, Ireland, and Sweden the
incidence of TAPVC was about 7.1/100.000 live births. This incidence is higher compared to 6.8 in the Baltimore-Washington Infant Study or
5.9 in the New England Regional Infant Cardiac Program. Several studies have reported case series with prenatally diagnosed supracardiac
TAPVC, some of them with drainage direct into the right SVC. However, all of these cases were without obstruction at the drainage level.
This is the first case of prenatally diagnosed isolated, obstructed supracardiac TAPVC with drainage directly into the right SVC, identified
by us in the literature. TAPVC is well tolerated in utero. This fact can be explained by the particularities of the fetal pulmonary
circulation: low pulmonary blood flow, due to high pulmonary vascular resistance. However, Rasanen et al showed that during the pregnancy
there is a slight increase of pulmonary blood flow compared with the combined cardiac output, from 13% at 20 weeks of gestation to 25% at 30
weeks of gestation, with no changes in the last semester. This pulmonary flow increase can explain the right-left ventricular discrepancy
after 28 weeks of gestation. After postnatal transition, the pulmonary blood flow increases and as a result of systemic and pulmonary venous
flow mixing in the right heart, the neonate will be cyanotic. If obstruction of pulmonary venous flow is associated, then pulmonary venous
congestion occurs. Untreated, this can become very quickly a life threatening condition. Prenatal diagnosis of isolated TAPVC is
challenging. Some indirect and direct signs suggesting the prenatal diagnose of isolated supracardiac TAPVC, are described in the
literature. The initial sign that can become obvious in the third trimester of pregnancy is the right ventricular predominance, with
increase of pulmonary blood flow. Another indirect sign detectable in 4-chamber view is a small left atrial size and “smooth” posterior
aspect of it. Dilation of the SVC and detection of an additional vein (vertical vein – in typical supracardiac TAPVC) in 3 VTV is helpful.
Low-flow color mapping in order to identify pulmonary veins could be helpful for diagnosis improvement. Also, abnormal pulsed Doppler flow
in pulmonary veins can give important information. Because of the low pulmonary blood flow in fetus, obstruction of the pulmonary venous
confluence may be difficult to detect. A4C and 3VT view are of great importance and compulsory in diagnosing isolated supracardiac TAPVC
beside Doppler color and pulsed Doppler flow imaging of pulmonary veins. However, in our particular supracardiac TAPVC case, there was no
additional vessel in the 3 VTV, because of the direct drainage of the common pulmonary venous confluence into the right SVC. We noticed a
dilated right SVC at the site of the pulmonary venous drainage in 3VTV, with a turbulent Doppler color flow at that level. Further careful
assessment of the right SVC allowed identification of the drainage site of the common confluence. TAPVC can also be diagnosed after birth,
during infancy, or even later. Recently, it was described a case of a 4-month-old infant without any pathological history, admitted for
perioral cyanosis and poor feeding, who was diagnosed with TAPVC, which was successfully repaired by surgical intervention. Zhang et al in
their study showed that comparing with surgical or AngioCT results, the postnatal echocardiography had a sensitivity of 97.6% and a
specificity of 99.9%. Unfortunately, even though we diagnosed our patient in utero, he died after surgery. On the other hand, a study
performed on patients with mixed-type TAPVC, underlined the fact that the mortality during the first year after surgery is high, but those
who survive past the 1st year, usually present a good prognosis, without sequelae. TAPVC can be associated with other cardiac malformations,
such as in the case described by Ide et al about a neonate diagnosed with a single ventricle, right atrial isomerism, pulmonary atresia with
major aortopulmonary collateral arteries, a small central pulmonary artery and a supracardiac TAPVC, who underwent an uneventful surgical
repair. Even though, complications after surgical repair, such as pulmonary arterial hypertension usually appear in the first 6 months after
surgery, this can appear also later on life, like in the case described by Martinez–Quintana about a teenager who developed pulmonary venous
obstruction and severe secondary pulmonary arterial hypertension after a surgical intervention for TAPVC during infancy. In the case
described above, severe pulmonary arterial hypertension appeared very quickly after the surgical intervention and led to the newborn's death
on the 3rd day after surgery. Other rare cases involving TAPVC were also reported in the specialty literature, such as the association
between tetralogy of Fallot with anomalous left coronary artery from pulmonary artery and totally anomalous pulmonary venous connection, or
the coexistence of TAPVC and persistent left superior vena cava. According to Shi et al obstructed TAPVC was discovered in 25% of newborns,
the mean surgical age were about 215 days of life with 51 deaths of the 768 cases with different types of anomalous pulmonary venous
connection. Although our case had a severe obstructed form and unfortunately died after surgery, we can emphasize that a prenatal diagnosis
of isolated, obstructed TAPVC is important for adequate postnatal planning of delivery and surgery in a tertiary center. Prenatal diagnosis
of isolated obstructed supracardiac TAPVR with drainage into the right SVC is possible by careful assessment of direct and indirect signs.
Prenatal diagnosis of obstructed forms allows emergency treatment after birth in tertiary cardiovascular centers. Abbreviations: 2D = bi-
dimensional, 3VTV = 3 vessel view, 4CV = 4 chamber view, AngioCT = computer tomography angiography, Ao = aorta, Ao arch = aortic arch, BCV =
brachiocephalic vein, CC = common venous confluence, Duct art. = ductus arteriosus, IVC = inferior vena cava, LA = left atrium, PA =
pulmonary artery, RA = right atrium, SVC = superior vena cava, TAPVC = total anomalous pulmonary venous connection, v = pulmonary veins. IM
and CM contributed equally to this study. The authors have no funding and conflicts of interest to disclose.
