Chronic diarrhea in adult patients due to various causes is very common in clinic, but patient suffering with mal-absorption due to
immunoproliferative small intestinal disease was rarely reported in China. A 35-year-old female presented with more than three years history
of chronic diarrhea, rickets, high serum value of immunoglobulin A protein, and anemia. Bone marrow aspiration suggested that the patient
was in a sideropenic and megalobastic anemia stage. Duodenal and ileac biopsies revealed atrophy and blunting villi. The bowel lamina
propria was infiltrated with slightly increased intraepithelial lymphocytes and mainly with diffuse plasma cells. The following enzyme
labeling immunohistochemistry results were strongly positive to alpha-heavy-chain. Computed tomography manifested she had diffuse thickening
of small intestine wall. At last a diagnosis of immunoproliferative small intestinal disease was made. On the first month, the patient was
treated with vitamin D supplements, calcium, magnesium, potassium, iron, folic acid, mecobalamin replacements and microflora probiotics. The
patient frequency of water diarrhea alleviated slightly, but her weight loss, anxiety neurosis and other disorders were still severe. After
taking with prednisone (40 mg per day, and gradually reduced to the lowest dose) for another month, the symptoms was gradually subsided. The
study shows that immunohistochemical staining for alpha-heavy chain proteins should be completed on small intestine biopsy specimens if the
patient is suspected a diagnosis of immunoproliferative small intestinal disease. Chronic diarrhea patients with mal-absorption syndrome due
to various causes are very common. The most often related causes are celiac disease, chronic intestinal infection, and so on. But those
patients who suffered with immunoproliferative small intestinal disease (IPSID) were only sporadic reported in world population. IPSID
defines a diffuse, benign, or malignant lymphoid infiltrate, affecting the mucosa of the small intestine, without any free interval of
normal mucosa. This disease primarily affects children and young adults with peak incidence in second and third decades and is mainly
observed in developing countries. IPSID known as “Mediterranean” lymphoma or alpha-heavy-chain disease (HCD) which is classified into 3
types according to the anatomical site: digestive, respiratory, and lymphoid. The digestive type is a synonym for IPSID, which can cause
severe enteropathy and give rise to malignant lymphoma. A definitive diagnosis of immunoproliferative small intestinal disease is made based
on the detection of alpha-heavy-chain proteins in the cytoplasm on immunohistochemistry. The pathologic stages of IPSID have been defined to
be the early stage (stage A), intermediate stage (stage B), and late stage (stage C). Stage A involves mature plasma cell infiltration of
the mucosal lamina propria in small intestine with variable villous atrophy. Stage B includes atypical plasma cell infiltration associated
with the presence of more or less atypical immunoblastic-like cells which extend at least to the submucosa, and subtotal or total villous
atrophy can be found. Stage C is characterized by sarcomatous proliferation invading the whole depth of the intestinal wall. We present the
case of a 35-year-old female with high level of immunoglobulin A protein in serum and massive dense plasma cell infiltration in intestinal
mucosa, who came to us with severe chronic water diarrhea and weight loss for more than 3 years. A 35-year-old female living in a rural area
came to our department with more than 3 years history of chronic diarrhea, rickets, high serum value of immunoglobulin A protein, and
anemia. She had been diagnosed with suspected celiac disease and chronic bacterial intestinal infection in other hospitals and then been
treated with gluten-free diet for more than 6 months, some antibiotics such as tetracycline, metronidazole, and ampicillin for more than 1
month, but with no effect. On physical examination, the patient was pale and nervous, and the body mass index (BMI) was about 15.6 kg/m2.
Initial laboratory investigations manifested that she was suffering with severe electrolytic disorder, anemia, but with normal liver and
renal functions, no allergic food ingredient, no pathogenic bacteria in stool cultures and parasitological examination of stools, negative
human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) and autoimmune antibodies, and light chains including kappa and lambda levels in serum and urine were
normal. The Helicobacter pylori (HP) hydrogen breath test was negative. But her immunoglobulin A titer in serum was about 22,900 mg/L (the
normal value is below 3820 mg/L in our hospital). Because of her high level of immunoglobulin A protein, we completed the bone marrow
aspiration and found no evidences to diagnose the patient with lymphoma, plasmoma, multiple myeloma, and so on. The percentage of mature and
immature plasma cells in the smear of bone marrow were about 3% and 2.5% (normal ratio) and a lot of megacaryocytes with many small round
nuclei were found simultaneously (Fig. 1) which suggested that the patient was in a sideropenic and megalobastic anemia stage. Protein
electrophoresis and immunofixation electrophoresis showed that there were no definitive monoclonal immunoglobulin protein bands in her
serum. Bone marrow aspiration: (A) normal ratio of mature and immature plasma cells in bone marrow puncture smear, Hematoxylin and Eosin
staining, magnification ×40. (B) megacaryocytes with many small round nuclei, Hematoxylin and Eosin staining, magnification ×200.
Gastrointestinal endoscopy was completed then. Duodenal and ileac biopsies revealed atrophy and blunting villi (Fig. 2). The bowel lamina
propria was infiltrated with slightly increased intraepithelial lymphocytes and mainly with diffuse plasma cells (Fig. 3A). The following
enzyme labeling immunohistochemistry results were strongly positive to alpha-heavy-chain (Fig. 3B), but negative to lambda and kappa light
chain. Computed tomography (CT) manifested she had no hepatosplenomegaly and no lymphadenopathy but had diffuse thickening of small
intestine wall (Fig. 4). Intestinal endoscopy: showed atrophy and blunting of villi of the duodenum (A) and the end of ilem (B). (A) Ileum
biopsy showed atrophy villi with blunting mucosa, increased intraepithelial lymphocytes (white arrows), and infiltrated with diffuse mature
plasma cells (black arrows), Hematoxylin and Eosin staining, magnification ×200. (B) Enzyme labeling immunohistochemistry staining showed
strong positive results for alpha-heavy chain aimed to the mucosa of small intestine, magnification ×100. CT scanning of abdomen: showed
diffuse thickening of small intestine wall, no hepatosplenomegaly and no lymphadenopathy. CT = computed tomography. We diagnosed this
patient with an immunoproliferative small intestinal disease based on upper investigation. She was started on vitamin D supplements,
calcium, magnesium, potassium, iron, folic acid, and mecobalamin replacements. At the same time, we treated her with microflora probiotics
additionally. One month later, her frequency of water diarrhea alleviated slightly, but her weight loss, anxiety neurosis, and other
disorders were still severe. She refused to be treated with anthracycline chemotherapy regimens, and agreed to be treated with prednisone
(40 mg per day, and gradually reduced to the lowest dose). Another 1 month later, she was feeling better, with solid stool (once or twice
per day) and had obvious weight restoration (BMI 19.5 kg/m2). The laboratory investigation manifested that the value of immunoglobulin A
protein titer in serum decreased to 16,700 mg/L. She would be in a closely outpatient follow-up procedure in our department. IPSID is a form
of lymphoma which arises in small intestinal mucosal associated lymphoid tissue (MALT), characterized by overproduction of a monoclonal
truncated immunoglobulin α-heavy chain without associated light chain. The present patient had suffered with a state of severe malabsorption
and a high level of immunoglobulin A protein in serum. Histological investigation showed atrophy villi and diffuse infiltration of mature
plasma cells in the small intestine. According to her high level of polyclonal immunoglobulin A in serum and massive infiltration of mature
plasma cells in intestine, we diagnosed this patient with an immunoproliferative small intestinal disease. Some searches showed that IPSID
was putatively triggered by Campylobacter and antimicrobials had been used in its early stage with consistent, albeit usually temporary,
success. But the present patient had no clinical remission after being treated with oral antibiotics for more than 1 month. Celiac disease
as an immune-mediated small intestinal enteropathy triggered by gluten has a prevalence about 0.5 to 1% of the population worldwide.
Measurements of antitissue transglutaminase and antiendomysial antibodies are the preferred initial screening tests for celiac disease
because of its high sensitivity and specificity. These 2 kinds of antibodies in this patient were negative. The patient was put on a gluten-
free diet for more than 6 months, but her diarrhea had no remission, gut plasma cell infiltration persisted, and hyper-IgA in serum
remained. Plasma cell infiltration in some patient with celiac disease can be found in proximal intestine, but never with such intensity,
especially in the ileum and colon mucosa. So we ruled out the diagnosis of celiac disease finally. We ruled out chronic infectious diarrhea
for negative findings of pathogenic bacteria in stool culture tests. However, the increase of serum polyclonal IgA is not the feature of
IPSID or alpha-chain disease which is characterized by the synthesis of a monotypic truncated immunoglobulin alpha-chain lacking associated
light chains. We herein reported the case of IPSID patient with severe enteropathy, who was difficult to make a definitive diagnosis because
of the lack of detectable M-protein. But several cases lacking of monoclonal alpha-chain protein had been reported previously. The supposed
cause is that the truncated alpha-chains have a strong tendency to polymerize and accumulate during the disease progression. We found
polyclonal immunoglobulin protein but not M protein band on immunoelectrophoresis, because of the polymerized and accumulated alpha-heavy
chain proteins in this patient, who had a normal level of kappa and lambda light chain in the serum. In the present case, the
immunohistochemical staining to alpha-heavy chain showed that mature plasma cells infiltration took place only in the mucosal lamina
propria, which demonstrated that the patient was in the stage of IPSID, digestive type, stage A. In conclusion, if a patient based on the
clinical characteristics is suspected a diagnosis of IPSID, even when M-proteins are not detected, immunohistochemical staining for alpha-
heavy-chain proteins should be completed on biopsy specimens. Abbreviations: BMI = body mass index, CT = computed tomography, HCD = heavy
chain disease, HIV = human immunodeficiency virus, HP = Helicobacter pylori, IPSID = immunoproliferative small intestinal disease, MALT =
mucosal-associated lymphoid tissue. The patient signed informed consent for the publication of this case report and any accompanying images.
Ethical approval of this study was obtained by the Ethics Committee of the Xiangya Hospital of Central South University, China. The authors
have no funding and conflicts of interest to disclose.
