Published reports of rib fractures in adult cattle are limited to the occurrence of chronic rib swellings caused by calluses, which are
unremarkable from a clinical standpoint, whereas studies identifying clinical signs of rib fractures were not found in a literature search.
This report describes the clinical and postmortem findings in four cows with rib fractures. The 13th rib was fractured in three cows and the
11th rib in the remaining cow; three fractures were on the right and one on the left side. Clinical and postmortem findings varied
considerably, and percussion of the rib cage elicited a pain response in only one cow. One cow had generalised peritonitis because of
perforation of the rumen by the fractured rib. One cow was recumbent because of pain and became a downer cow, and two other cows had
bronchopneumonia, which was a sequel to osteomyelitis of the fracture site in one. In the absence of a history of trauma, the diagnosis of
rib fracture based on clinical signs alone is difficult. Although rib fractures undoubtedly are very painful, the four cases described in
this report suggest that they are difficult to diagnose in cattle because associated clinical signs are nonspecific. Typical clinical sings
of rib fracture are difficult to characterise in cattle even though rib fractures occur commonly in this species. It can be assumed that
this is a painful condition similar to rib fracture in people. The idea for the study came after the first author slipped on a patch of ice
and sustained an extremely painful rib fracture. In calves, the most common cause of rib fracture is trauma incurred during forced
extraction during dystocia . Causes of rib fracture in mature cattle include trauma sustained in falls, horn injuries, collisions with
objects or other animals, mishaps during transport, mounting by other cattle and entrapment . Spontaneous rib fracture has been described in
cattle with phosphorus deficiency . Acute rib fracture can be diagnosed by palpation or percussion, which elicits a pronounced pain
response, whereas old fractures are recognised by swelling over the affected rib due to ossification . Osseous sequestration is rare after
rib fracture . Swellings at the costochondral junctions of the 7th to 9th ribs indicating previous fractures are often seen in lame cows
[14, 15], and mid-shaft rib fractures of the 2nd to 4th ribs have been associated with a low body condition score, particularly in older
cows . A study of approximately 2000 cows from 13 dairy herds showed that the herd prevalence of palpable swellings at the costocondral
junctions of the 7th to 9th ribs was 3.6–26.8% with 15.8% of cows affected overall [15, 17]. Those findings were supported by the results of
a study from the United Kingdom . The prevalence of rib swellings was 5.0% in cows with a mobility score of 0 (not lame) and 47.2% in cows
with a score of 3 (distinct lameness), and it was postulated that rib fractures were the result of lame cows dropping to the ground faster
than sound cows when lying down . This leads to compression of the chest and fracture at the point of the greatest curvature, which is the
costochondral junction of the 7th to 9th ribs. Examination of the internal aspects of more than 300 slaughter cows revealed ossified
swellings approximately 10–20 cm dorsal to the costochondral junction of the 3rd to 5th ribs in about 10% of the carcases . Studies on
clinical signs and management of rib fractures were not identified in a literature search using the PubMed and VetMed Resource databases
from 1975 to 2015 and the keywords, cattle, rib and fracture. The purpose of this report was to describe 4 cases of rib fracture in cows
seen at our clinic from 1991 to 2015 (Tables 1, 2). These cases emphasize that clinical signs of rib fracture vary widely in cows and
antemortem diagnosis is very difficult.Table 1Clinical and postmortem findings in four cows with rib fracturesCow No.Rectal temperature
(°C), heart and respiratory rates (per minute)Main clinical signsClinical diagnosisMain postmortem findings139.4/80/30Rumen atony, positive
foreign body tests, abdominal guarding, loss of negative abdominal pressure, abdominocentesis yielded an exudatePeritonitisFracture of left
13th rib, perforation of rumen, generalised peritonitis239.7/72/52Tachypnoea, increased breath sounds, positive foreign body tests,
percussion of right thoracic wall painful, epistaxis, terminal recumbencyBronchopneumoniaFracture of 13th thoracic vertebra and right 13th
rib, purulent osteomyelitis with extension to lung, lung abscess338.3/68/28Downer cow postpartum initially because of hypocalcaemia and
hypomagnesaemia and then because of pain caused by rib fractureDowner cow syndromeFracture of right 11th rib with acute
haemorrhage439.3/96/52Tachypnoea, increased breath sounds, pleuritic friction rubs, cough, epistaxis, pleural effusion, terminal
recumbencyBronchopneumoniaAcute splintered fracture of right 13th rib with soft tissue laceration, severe acute bronchopneumonia caused by
Mannheimia haemolytica, coxarthrosis and rupture of the iliofemoral ligament on the left side Table 2Results of haematological analysis in
four cows with rib fracturesCow No.Variable (reference range)Haematocrit (33–36%)Total leukocyte count (5000–10,000/µl)Plasma protein
(60–80 g/l)Fibrinogen (3–5 g/l)Glutaraldehyde test (10–15 mins)1427400616ND226920092122.53408500626>104359900788>10 ND not done Clinical and
postmortem findings in four cows with rib fractures Results of haematological analysis in four cows with rib fractures ND not done Cow 1: A
3-year-old Brown Swiss cow that had calved without assistance six weeks previously was referred to our clinic because of mild ruminal
tympany, lack of response to treatment with a magnet and a 3-day history of anorexia. The cow was in poor general health and had a rectal
temperature of 39.3 °C, a heart rate of 80 beats per minute (bpm), a respiratory rate of 30 breaths per minute and no rumen motility. There
was bruxism and guarding of the abdominal wall. Tests for foreign bodies (withers pinch, percussion of the reticular region and lateral
thorax, upward pressure applied to the xyphoid region using a pole) were positive. Transrectal examination showed that there was no negative
pressure in the abdomen. Radiographs of the reticulum were normal, and haematological analysis showed haemoconcentration. Retroperitoneal
fluid collected by abdominocentesis was opaque and yellow and had a specific gravity of 1026, a protein concentration of 33 g/l and 10,500
leukocytes/µl (70% neutrophils, 29% monocytes and 1% lymphocytes). A diagnosis of peritonitis possibly caused by a perforating abomasal
ulcer was made, and because of a poor prognosis, the cow was slaughtered. There was generalised peritonitis with widespread adhesions
throughout the abdomen, particularly on the left side of the rumen, and the abdominal cavity contained a large amount of fibrinous exudate.
The last rib on the left side was fractured, and a sharp bone fragment pointing inward had perforated the rumen, resulting in leakage of
rumen contents and subsequent peritonitis. Cow 2: A 3.5-year-old Brown Swiss cow that was 6 months pregnant was referred to our clinic
because of stiff gait and reluctance to lie down, which had been observed for three months before referral. The cow had a normal appetite
but appeared painful and uncomfortable particularly when the rumen was full. The general health of the cow was mildly abnormal, and the
rectal temperature was 39.7 °C, the heart rate 72 bpm and the respiratory rate 52 breaths per minute. Respiration was costoabdominal but had
a strong abdominal component, and breath sounds were increased. Rumen motility was strong and rumen fill and stratification were normal.
Foreign body tests were consistently positive, abdominal guarding was present, and percussion of the right thoracic wall elicited a painful
response. Haematological analysis showed anaemia and increased protein and fibrinogen concentrations, and the clotting time in the
glutaraldehyde test was shorter than normal. Ultrasonography of the thorax and abdomen revealed no abnormalities, and radiography of the
reticulum and lungs showed an increase in the radiodensity of the interstitial lung tissue. Endoscopy of the upper respiratory tract was
normal. A tentative diagnosis of bronchopneumonia was made and the cow treated with danofloxacin (1.25 mg/kg, intravenously; Advocid,
Zoetis, Switzerland) and 10 l of a solution containing 9 g NaCl and 50 g glucose per litre via an indwelling jugular vein catheter, daily,
for three days. On the fourth day, the cow was unable to rise and was euthanased with pentobarbital (70 mg/kg, intravenously; Streuli
Pharma, Uznach, Switzerland) immediately after blood and purulent material were seen flowing from both nostrils accompanied by severe
tachypnoea during an attempt to lift the cow. Postmortem examination showed a fracture of the 13th thoracic vertebra and 13th rib on the
right side and purulent osteomyelitis that had extended into the right lung with subsequent abscess formation. Cow 3: A 12-year-old Brown
Swiss cow was referred to our clinic because of inability to rise after an unassisted calving, despite multiple treatments with calcium
borogluconate administered intravenously and sodium phosphate given orally. The cow was bright and alert and in sternal recumbency at the
time of admission. The general health of the cow was only mildly affected, the appetite was reduced, the rectal temperature was 38.3 °C, the
heart rate was 68 bpm and the respiratory rate was 28 breaths per minute. The cow had ruminal atony and passed small amounts of faeces.
Haematological analysis showed haemoconcentration, hypocalcaemia (1.95 mmol/l, normal 2.3–2.6 mmol/l), hypomagnesaemia (0.50 mmol/l, normal
0.8–1.0 mmol/l) and a mild increase in the activity of creatine kinase (4773 U/l, normal 70–170 U/l). A diagnosis of downer cow syndrome
associated with hypocalcaemia and hypomagnesaemia was made and the cow was treated daily for 5 days with 10 l of a solution containing 9 g
NaCl and 50 g glucose per litre, 500 ml of a 40% calcium borogluconate solution (Calcamyl-40 M, Graeub, Bern, Switzerland) and 500 ml of
glucose solution containing magnesium (Glucamagnesium, Werner Stricker, Zollikofen, Switzerland), via an indwelling jugular vein catheter,
with no response. The cow also received multiple doses of calcium (Calcivet, Provet, Lyssach, Switzerland) and magnesium preparations
(Magnoral, Streuli Pharma) administered via an orogastric tube, and ketoprofen (3 mg/kg; Rifen, Streuli Pharma) intravenously. The cow was
rolled from one side onto the other every four hours and several attempts to lift the cow using a transport sling were made every day;
however, the cow failed to support any weight despite the fact that serum electrolyte concentrations had normalised. Likewise, the cow did
not support any body weight in a flotation tank (Aqua Cow Rise System, Denmark) and was therefore euthanased (same method as used in cow 2)
after 5 days of unsuccessful treatment. Postmortem examination showed a fracture of the 11th rib on the right side and associated
haemorrhage, about 15 cm distal to the vertebral column (Fig. 1). The fracture was just caudal to the diaphragm and there were adhesions
between the lungs and the parietal pleura and diaphragm in that area.Fig. 1Postmortem view of a rib fracture. Postmortem view of a fracture
of the 11th rib on the right side in cow 3 Postmortem view of a rib fracture. Postmortem view of a fracture of the 11th rib on the right
side in cow 3 Cow 4: A 9-year-old Holstein–Friesian cow was referred to our clinic for evaluation of anorexia. Five days before referral,
the cow had been chased by another cow and had become trapped between a wall and a post. Strong traction was required to free the cow and
for a short time afterwards, she was unable to rise. The referring veterinarian treated the cow with enrofloxacin, flunixin meglumine and
dexamethasone. The general health of the cow was moderately abnormal, and physical examination revealed sunken eyes, reduced skin turgor, a
rectal temperature of 39.3 °C, a heart rate of 96 bpm and a respiratory rate of 52 breaths per minute. The cow stood with her head and neck
extended because of dyspnea, which was characterised by a marked abdominal component of respiration. There was bilateral seromucous nasal
discharge and a spontaneous cough, and auscultation of the chest revealed increased breaths sounds and a pleuritic friction rub. The stride
in the hind legs was shorter than normal and a cracking sound originating from the hind end of the cow was audible at the walk. The blood
concentrations of calcium, phosphorus and magnesium were normal, and the activity of creatine kinase was mildly elevated (1355 U/l).
Ultrasonograms of the thorax and abdomen showed bilateral pleural effusion, which had a depth of about 2 cm. The right lung was consolidated
and suspended in the pleuritic fluid and the pleura had several comet-tail artifacts. The ventral lung regions were radiodense. Endoscopy of
the trachea to the level of the bifurcation revealed white respiratory secretion, from which Mannheimia haemolytica was isolated. A
diagnosis of bronchopneumonia attributable to Mannheimia haemolytica was made and the cow treated with cefquinom (2.5 mg/kg; Cobactan 7.5%,
MSD Animal Health, Luzern, Switzerland), administered subcutaneously, and 10 l of a solution containing 9 g NaCl and 50 g glucose per l and
calcium borogluconate (Calcamyl-40MP), administered intravenously via an indwelling jugular vein catheter. The condition of the cow
deteriorated despite treatment, and euthanasia was elected because she could not stand and was groaning continuously. Postmortem examination
showed an acute splintered fracture of the last rib on the right about 15 cm distal to the costovertebral joint accompanied by acute
haemorrhage and soft tissue lacerations. The cow also had severe acute fibrinous and seropurulent bronchopneumonia because of infection with
Mannheimia haemolytica and coxarthrosis with rupture of the iliofemoral ligament of the left hind limb. Of 20,100 cattle with internal
diseases examined at the Department of Farm Animals, University of Zurich, between 1991 and 2015, only four had clinical signs of a rib
fracture. Thus, rib fracture had an incidence of 0.0005% over a 25-year period and can be considered an extremely rare cause of referral in
cattle. Rib fractures are extremely painful in people, and it can be assumed that the same is true for cattle. In contrast, old rib
fractures, which are apparent as rib swellings and not associated with clinical signs, are common in cattle with chronic lameness and some
herds have a prevalence of about 16% . The discrepancy between the low incidence of cases with clinical signs in our study and the
relatively high prevalence of healed rib fractures reported in the literature is likely because clinical signs of acute rib fracture in
cattle often are nonspecific and not associated with visible and palpable signs. In contrast, inspiratory dyspnoea is a typical sign of rib
fracture associated with callus formation at the fracture site in calves . In the cases described in this report, clinical signs varied
depending on the circumstances of the injury that led to the fracture. In cow 1, perforation of the rumen by the fractured rib resulted in
leakage of ingesta into the abdominal cavity and subsequent generalised peritonitis. Cow 3 had downer cow syndrome and acute haemorrhage at
the fracture site, and it was assumed that the cow fell because of hypocalcaemia thereby sustaining a rib fracture. Rib swellings seen in
lame cows indicating previous rib fractures also have been attributed to falls [14, 15, 18]. In the two remaining cows, the rib fracture was
accompanied by acute bronchopneumonia. In cow 2, this was the direct result of osteomyelitis with spread of purulent material into the
lungs. In the remaining cow, there was no obvious association between acute bronchopneumonia caused by Mannheimia haemolytica infection and
the fracture of the last rib. However, two other cows from the same herd with bronchopneumonia caused by the same agent had been seen at our
clinic a few weeks previously. It is therefore conceivable that the cow had a latent infection and the stress associated with the entrapment
and rib fracture led to bronchopneumonia. We are aware of only one reference that described the clinical signs of cattle with acute rib
fractures; a distinct pain response, characterised by grunting, is elicited by percussion of or pressure applied to the rib cage . Although
our examination protocol includes percussion of the rib cage using a rubber mallet—in addition to foreign body tests (withers pinch,
percussion of the reticular region, pressure applied to the xyphoid region)—a pain response to percussion of the rib cage could be elicited
only in cow 2. Likewise, the results of haematological analysis were not specific for rib fracture. Two cows had haemoconcentration, which
was attributed to generalised peritonitis (cow 1) and dehydration (cow 3). The increased protein and fibrinogen concentrations and the
abnormal glutaraldehyde test result in cow 3 reflected inflammation attributable to osteomyelitis and lung abscessation. The likely cause of
the rib fracture was a fall associated with hypocalcaemia in cow 3 and entrapment in cow 4. In cows 1 and 2, the cause was not clear but
injury caused by a fall or inflicted by the horns of herd mates was possible. Cattle with horn injuries are often seen at our clinic [20,
21]. The 13th rib was fractured in three cows and the 11th rib in the remaining cow, and three fractures were on the right and one on the
left side. Other authors reported that ribs 9–11 are most commonly affected because they form the greatest curvature of the trunk and absorb
the primary impact during a fall . This report was limited to the description of cows with rib fracture; it was not possible to establish
valid diagnostic guidelines because of the wide variation in clinical signs and post-mortem findings in the affected cows. This underscores
the importance of careful history taking (with respect to possible trauma and the presence of horned herd mates) and thorough clinical
examination. Although rib fractures undoubtedly are very painful, they are difficult to diagnose in cattle because associated clinical signs
are nonspecific. Cows with splintered rib fracture, perforation of the rumen by the fractured rib and other complications including
osteomyelitis, abscess formation and recumbency should be euthanased rather than treated. The occurrence of rib fracture can be minimised by
installing non-slip barn floors, eliminating bottlenecks where cows become trapped and injured and by dehorning aggressive cows. UB was in
charge of clinical and ultrasonographic examination of the cows, writer of the manuscript, submission of the article initiated. SW involved
in the clinical examination of cows 3 and 4. UH responsible for the postmortem examination of cows 3 and 4. KN involved in the clinical
examination of the cows. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. The authors thank the technicians of the Division of Diagnostic
Imaging for the radiographic examination of the cows, the technicians of the Medical Laboratory for the haematological and biochemical
analyses and the animal assistants for looking after the cows. The authors declare that they have no competing interests. Consent was
obtained from the owners of the cows for publication of this manuscript and any accompanying images.
