Helicobacter cinaedi causes bacteremia and cellulitis, mainly in immunocompromised patients. We report a rare case of H. cinaedi bacteremia
with cellulitis in a living-donor kidney transplant recipient identified by matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization time-of-flight mass
spectrometry (MALDI-TOF MS). A 54-year-old Asian man with IgA nephropathy underwent living-donor kidney transplantation 14 years previously.
He was admitted to our hospital for evaluation of fever and multifocal cellulitis. H. cinaedi was isolated and identified from the patient’s
blood using matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization time-of-flight mass spectrometry and gyrase subunit B-targeted polymerase chain
reaction assays. Matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization time-of-flight mass spectrometry has proven over the years to be a rapid and
accurate universal method for the identification of microorganisms. The combined use of these detection methods enabled the appropriate
administration of 6 weeks of antibiotic therapy. The patient recovered completely, with no recurrence. Helicobacter cinaedi is a gram-
negative enterohepatic spiral bacillus found in the digestive tracts of humans and animals (e.g., dogs, cats, and hamsters). This organism
was first isolated from rectal cultures from homosexual men in 1984 . Since that time, H. cinaedi infections have been detected from blood
and stool samples obtained mainly from immunocompromised patients . The first case of H. cinaedi infection in Japan in an immunosuppressed
patient was reported in 2003 . However, recent reports have demonstrated that this organism can cause nosocomial infections in
immunocompetent patients after orthopedic surgery . The reported detection rate of H. cinaedi among positive blood cultures (i.e., blood
samples with any positive culture result) in Tokyo, Japan is 0.22% . The clinical manifestations of H. cinaedi infection include fever,
enterocolitis, diarrhea, cellulitis, arthritis, meningitis, and recurrent bacteremia. Isolation of H. cinaedi requires a long incubation
period in automated blood culture, and this pathogen is sometimes resistant to macrolides and quinolones . For these reasons, H. cinaedi
infections tend to be overlooked, are likely to recur, and often require long-term antibiotic therapy. In addition, data on H. cinaedi
infection in kidney transplant recipients are very limited; only five cases have been reported to date [3, 7]. Several genomic methods, such
as 16S rRNA sequencing and polymerase chain reaction (PCR), can be used to identify H. cinaedi. Matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization
time-of-flight mass spectrometry (MALDI-TOF MS) is a new technology for routine identification of bacteria in clinical microbiology
laboratories. Here, we report a case of H. cinaedi bacteremia with cellulitis in a living-donor kidney transplant recipient identified by
MALDI-TOF MS, with a review of the related literature. A 54-year-old Asian man with IgA nephropathy underwent living-donor kidney
transplantation 14 years previously. His medical condition had been almost stable for 14 years. He developed multifocal salmon-pink skin
discoloration, and swelling and spontaneous pain in the left knee and leg. The symptoms had gradually expanded across the right forearm and
outside of the right thigh. He was admitted to our hospital for the evaluation of fever (39 °C) and multifocal cellulitis (Fig. 1). Two
months before admission, he had developed chronic diarrhea. His serum creatinine level was stabilized at 1.7 mg/dL with maintenance
immunosuppressive therapy comprising tacrolimus (3 mg/day), mycophenolate mofetil (1500 mg/day), and prednisone (4 mg every other day). The
tacrolimus trough concentration was 6.3 ng/mL. The patient had been a dog breeder for 12 years. On admission, his white blood cell count was
12,400/μL and his C-reactive protein level was 3.9 mg/dL. The patient was initially treated with ampicillin/sulbactam (9 g/day
intravenously). Two days after the initiation of this therapy, he was afebrile. Four days later, an automated blood culture (Bactec FX®;
Becton–Dickinson and Company, Sparks, MD, USA) showed positivity for gram-negative spiral bacilli. A colony obtained from the patient’s
blood culture was analyzed by MALDI-TOF MS (Biotyper ver. 3.0®; Bruker Corporation, Germany). The identification score was 2.064 (>2.0),
indicating accurate identification of H. cinaedi (Fig. 2). Additional evaluation of the patient’s blood specifically for H. cinaedi by means
of gyrase subunit B (gyrB)-targeted PCR assays (using the forward primer AGGGATTCCACAAAGTGAGC and the reverse primer TCTTGTCCTGTGCGTTCATC to
amplify the region of the gyrB gene) yielded positive results. We performed gyrB-targeted PCR using a single colony isolated from a blood
culture. We used distilled water (DNA- and DNase-free water) as a negative control to prevent contamination of gyrB-targeted PCR (Fig. 3).
In addition, we performed 16S rRNA gene sequencing of this strain, and the results were > 99% consistent with the existing sequence
(Fig. 4). Given these results, we diagnosed the patient with H. cinaedi bacteremia with cellulitis. We examined the genomic heat shock
protein (HSP) 60 sequence of the blood culture isolate, which resulted in identification of cluster B H. cinaedi. A blood culture obtained
at 11 days was positive for H. cinaedi, but a culture obtained at 15 days was negative. The patient’s cellulitis gradually resolved. The
patient continued antibiotic treatment for a total of 6 weeks (ampicillin-sulbactam in a drip for 2 weeks and oral levofloxacin for
4 weeks), and he had no recurrence 6 months after this therapy. His stool culture was negative, although it was taken after treatment. We
did not apply enteric bacteria elimination in this case.Fig. 1 Left, cellulitis in the left lower leg and knee. Local swelling with salmon-
pink skin discoloration and local heat with spontaneous pain was evident. Right, left leg after 6 weeks of antibiotic therapy Fig. 2Intact-
cell mass spectrometry profiling using matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization time-of-flight mass spectrometry. Upper panel, intact-
cell mass spectrometry profiles from our case; lower panel, the reference case. Table at bottom shows the identification score using the
integrated pattern-matching algorithm of the MALDI Biotyper 3.0 software® (Bruker Corp., Germany). The patient’s identification score was
2.064. A score of ≥2.0 is useful for identification to the species level Fig. 3Detection of Helicobacter cinaedi in blood using gyrase
subunit B-targeted polymerase chain reaction. M molecular size marker, Nc negative control: distilled water (DNA- and DNase-free water).
Polymerase chain reaction was performed using the forward primer AGGGATTCCACAAAGTGAGC and the reverse primer TCTTGTCCTGTGCGTTCATC. This
resulted in a product of 195 base pair Fig. 4Partial sequence of the Helicobacter cinaedi 16S rRNA gene Left, cellulitis in the left lower
leg and knee. Local swelling with salmon-pink skin discoloration and local heat with spontaneous pain was evident. Right, left leg after
6 weeks of antibiotic therapy Intact-cell mass spectrometry profiling using matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization time-of-flight mass
spectrometry. Upper panel, intact-cell mass spectrometry profiles from our case; lower panel, the reference case. Table at bottom shows the
identification score using the integrated pattern-matching algorithm of the MALDI Biotyper 3.0 software® (Bruker Corp., Germany). The
patient’s identification score was 2.064. A score of ≥2.0 is useful for identification to the species level Detection of Helicobacter
cinaedi in blood using gyrase subunit B-targeted polymerase chain reaction. M molecular size marker, Nc negative control: distilled water
(DNA- and DNase-free water). Polymerase chain reaction was performed using the forward primer AGGGATTCCACAAAGTGAGC and the reverse primer
TCTTGTCCTGTGCGTTCATC. This resulted in a product of 195 base pair Partial sequence of the Helicobacter cinaedi 16S rRNA gene Helicobacter
cinaedi infection in kidney transplant recipients remains poorly understood. Only six cases, including our case, have been reported to date.
All six cases had a positive blood culture, and four of these patients had cellulitis [3, 7]. The correlation between H. cinaedi infection
and kidney transplantation may be due to the use of immunosuppressive agents. The tacrolimus trough concentration in our patient was
slightly higher than expected. The infectious route of this pathogen has not been clarified. Imafuku et al. recently speculated that
translocation from the intestine to the blood vessels induced secondary bacteremia with several of the symptoms described in these cases, as
H. cinaedi bacteremia developed after colonic perforation in two of four cases. In general, the distinct clinical features of H. cinaedi
bacteremia include fever, enterocolitis, diarrhea, cellulitis, arthritis, meningitis, and recurrent bacteremia. Cellulitis in this condition
has the distinct characteristic features of multifocal salmon-pink skin discoloration with no wound infection . In our case, such skin
discoloration with swelling and spontaneous pain was evident. H. cinaedi infection should thus be included in the differential diagnosis of
multifocal cellulitis accompanied by fever in kidney transplant recipients. The detection of H. cinaedi is difficult for two reasons: (1)
4–10 (median, 5) days are required for the detection of these slow-growing pathogens in blood culture, and (2) they grow in film-like shapes
and are likely to go unnoticed . The reported lengths of time required for detection of H. cinaedi in kidney transplant recipients are 5, 7,
4, 3, and 4 days; in our case, 4 days were required. Therefore, Araoka et al. speculated that the observation period should be extended to
at least 7 days when a clinician suspects infection with this pathogen. In addition, Kawamura et al. pointed out differences in detection
sensitivity among blood culture systems; the VersaTREK system® (Kohjin Bio, Saitama, Japan) is superior to the Bactec system, which we used.
The former system can detect the pathogen within 3 days, whereas the latter system requires 4–10 days. We performed additional assays to
identify the infecting strain in our case because the commercially available detection kit has limitations: few strains are included in the
kit, and the identification rate of the kit requires improvement. The accuracy of 16S rRNA gene sequence analysis is also limited because of
the high degree of similarity among closely related Helicobacter species . GyrB-targeted PCR is more specific for H. cinaedi . MALDI-TOF MS
has proven over the years to be a simple, rapid, and accurate universal method for the identification of microorganisms, including H.
cinaedi strains . Minimal preparation is required for MALDI-TOF MS . Samples are overlaid with a suitable matrix (alpha-
cyano-4-hydroxycinnamic acid in 50% acetonitrile and 2.5% trifluoroacetic acid) and left for a few minutes to dry before being subjected to
the mass spectrometry. After adding the organic matrix to the biomolecules, co-crystallization proceeds rapidly in a spatial array on the
target plate. The size and intensities of the peaks of the detected molecules depend on the matrix selected. Then the mixed sample receives
a fixed, pulsed laser beam. The part of the matrix gets heated and the mixed sample become excited and ionized states. Ionized molecules are
accelerated electronically and converted from TOF measurements to mass/charge values. The result is shown as a spectrum. Each spectrum
corresponds to a molecular fragment of the cell during laser desorption. The same bacterium can yield different mass spectra. Protein mass
patterns can be used for identification of bacteria at the genus and species levels . Brucker Corporation has an algorithm for phylogenetic
analysis, which has not been published. Many studies have shown that MALDI-TOF MS decreases both the time to bacterial identification and
the time to effective antibiotic therapy [12, 13]. Regarding the rapidity of identification of bacteria, Seng et al. estimated a mean time
to identification by MALDI-TOF MS of 6 min, whereas conventional techniques require 3–48 h. The cost of bacterial identification by MALDI-
TOF MS was estimated by Seng et al. to be 17–32% of that of conventional identification methods. In our case, MALDI-TOF MS showed positivity
for H. cinaedi earlier than gyrB-targeted PCR, enabling us to determine rapidly that a 6-week period of antibiotic therapy was appropriate.
Although no report has described the isolation of the same H. cinaedi strain from a human patient and his/her pet, H. cinaedi infection is
thought to be zoonotic . In our case, subsequent gyrB-targeted PCR analysis of a stool sample from the patient’s pet yielded negative
results. Taniguchi et al. speculated that H. cinaedi comprises two different lineages defined by HSP60 sequences: (1) cluster A from animals
and (2) cluster B from humans. We examined the HSP60 sequence of the patient’s blood culture and identified cluster B H. cinaedi. Taken
together, these findings suggest that our patient was not infected from his dog. The reason that a blood culture obtained at 11 days was
positive and a culture obtained at 15 days was negative in our case is unclear. We speculate that complete eradication of H. cinaedi
required a prolonged period of antibiotic treatment, possibly because of infection of an atherosclerotic plaque. Khan et al. reported
detection of H. cinaedi antigen in atherosclerotic plaques in postmortem human specimens. No guideline for the antibiotic treatment of H.
cinaedi infection has been established. Because many reports indicate that H. cinaedi infection is likely to recur, a 2- to 6-week duration
of antibiotic therapy has been recommended. Although one report described positive results of selective decontamination of the digestive
tract , even in cases of initial H. cinaedi infection, the effectiveness of this eradication therapy remains undetermined. We have described
a rare case of H. cinaedi bacteremia with cellulitis in a living-donor kidney transplant recipient, which was identified by MALDI-TOF MS. In
this paper, we wish to emphasize the importance of rapid and accurate identification of the pathogenic bacterium. A positive blood culture
of gram-negative spiral bacilli from immunocompromised patients is suggestive of infection by H. cinaedi, and in such cases the bacterium
should be identified rapidly. H. cinaedi infection should be included in the differential diagnosis of multifocal cellulitis with fever,
especially in immunocompromised patients. MALDI-TOF MS is a simple, rapid, and accurate method of H. cinaedi detection. gyrase subunit B
polymerase chain reaction matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization–time-of-flight mass spectrometry heat shock protein 60 AK designed the
study, performed the data analysis, and wrote the manuscript; IY, YT, MK, TY, HK, AM, YN, AK, KK, AS, YT, IO, NT, SH, HY and TY critically
revised the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. None. The English in this document has been checked by at least
two professional editors, both native speakers of English. For a certificate, please see:http://www.textcheck.com/certificate/2CD3TJ. The
authors declare that they have no competing interests. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this case
report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor of this journal. The authors adhered
to CARE guidelines/methodology.
