There are roughly 5 to 10 million persons infected with human T-lymphotropic virus type 1 (HTLV-1) worldwide, and the safety of treating
this population with biologics remains poorly understood. An HTLV-1-infected 66-year-old female with HTLV-1 uveitis (HU) and
HTLV-1-associated myelopathy/tropical spastic paraparesis (HAM/TSP). Her HU had been in remission and her HAM/TSP symptoms had been managed
effectively with oral steroids for years. However, she developed severe rheumatoid arthritis (RA) after failing to respond well to
conventional anti-rheumatic agents. She was administered two intravenous 8mg/kg doses of the biologic tocilizumab. Subsequently, her RA
symptoms resolved, but she suffered a recurrence of HU and exacerbation of HAM/TSP symptoms. When she was switched back to steroid-based
treatment, HU and HAM symptoms both improved, but RA symptoms again worsened. Finally, an attempt to substitute the biologic abatacept and
reduce the steroids failed when HAM/TSP symptoms again became aggravated. To the best of our knowledge, this represents the first report
worldwide of a biologic aggravating HTLV-1-associated conditions. This report suggests that caution is advised when using biologics to treat
HTLV-1-infected patients, though further research is required to clarify the situation. It is estimated that there are 5 to 10 million
individuals worldwide infected with human T-lymphotropic virus type 1 (HTLV-1), and this is widely perceived to be an underestimate. HTLV-1
causes a variety of inflammatory conditions as well as a rare but aggressive cancer known as adult T-cell leukemia/lymphoma. There are
approximately 1 million HTLV-1-infected persons in Japan, an HTLV-1-endemic country, with the highest prevalence in the southwestern areas
of the country, namely Kyushu and Okinawa. HTLV-1 uveitis (HU) develops when activated HTLV-1-infected lymphocytes invade the eye and
release inflammatory cytokines, invoking an inflammatory immune response. HU accounts for a relatively high percentage of uveitides in
southwestern Japan (estimated 3% to 5% compared with the national average of roughly 1% of uveitides). The rare neurodegenerative disease
HTLV-1-associated myelopathy/tropical spastic paraparesis (HAM/TSP) develops in a small fraction of infected persons, with estimates ranging
from 0.25% to 3% lifetime incidence. HAM/TSP presents as progressively worsening myelopathic symptoms such as spastic paraparesis, lower
limb sensory disturbances, and bladder, bowel, and erectile dysfunction. Many elderly patients require treatment for more than 1 condition,
and HTLV-1-infected patients are no exception. There are a number of infected patients seeking treatment for rheumatoid arthritis (RA), and
it is unclear how certain therapies may affect them differently from their uninfected counterparts. This is especially relevant in Japan,
where HTLV-1 is endemic and the average life expectancy is relatively high. There are various treatment options available for RA. Of
particular concern are biologics, such as tocilizumab (TCZ), a humanized monoclonal antibody against the interleukin-6 (IL-6) receptor,
which is an immunosuppressive drug used to treat RA. We herein report a case in which an HTLV-1-infected patient with RA was treated with
TCZ and suffered a recurrence of HU and exacerbation of HAM/TSP symptoms. To the authors’ knowledge, this represents the first reported case
of a biologic exacerbating an HTLV-1-associated disease. A 66-year-old female patient who had developed dry eyes and mouth was seen at
Kagoshima University Hospital, Kagoshima City, Kagoshima Prefecture in 1988. She was diagnosed with Sjögren syndrome due to her symptoms and
positive lab tests for anti-SS-A/Ro antibody (103.0 U/m), anti-SSB/La antibody (35.4 U/mL), and antinuclear antibodies (1:40) (Fig. 1). In
1989, she noticed muscle weakness in both hands. Joint pain in the fingers appeared in 1996. She soon began to notice numbness and weakness
in both legs as well. In 2002, she developed uveitis in both eyes and was prescribed steroid eye drops. In 2006, she presented with
paresthesia of the palms and soles of the feet, abnormal heaviness in the legs, and dysuria. Laboratory tests revealed that she was
HTLV-1-positive (particle agglutination method), and she was diagnosed with HAM/TSP. Peripheral nerve lesions were ruled out because the
symptoms were symmetrical without various focal points and because she presented with hyperreflexia and spasticity rather than hyporeflexia.
At Kagoshima University Hospital, she was treated with methyl-prednisolone (mPSL) pulse therapy (1000 mg/d for 3 days) followed by oral
prednisolone (PSL) maintenance therapy, which alleviated the HAM/TSP symptoms, and then she was referred for follow-up at Ohkatsu Hospital,
Kagoshima City, Kagoshima prefecture. There, from 2007 to 2010, her HAM/TSP symptoms were managed effectively with PSL, and her uveitis
remained in remission—she only required regular eye drops (0.1% sodium hyaluronate) for dry eyes. Timeline of the events leading up to the
administration of tocilizumab and subsequent exacerbation of HTLV-1-related symptoms. Left column: year during which the event occurred.
Middle column: symptoms reported by the patient including reactions to treatments. Right column: actions taken by the attending physician
such as making a diagnosis, prescribing or administering a treatment, or performing a test. HTLV-1 = human T-lymphotropic virus type 1. Then
in 2010, vision in the right eye became blurred, and she visited Miyata Eye Hospital in Miyakonojo City, Miyazaki Prefecture. She was found
to have right granulomatous anterior-intermediate uveitis and secondary glaucoma. As neither test results nor fundoscopy was suggestive of
any other type of uveitis, she was diagnosed with HU (Fig. 2). Inflammation rapidly resolved with hypotensive treatment and steroid
eyedrops, and intraocular pressure normalized. Eyes during recurrence of HTLV-1 uveitis. Top left: mutton-fat keratic precipitates are
present in the anterior of the right eye. Bottom left: vitreous opacity is present, and fundus visibility is poor. Right column: no
inflammation is evident in the left eye. HTLV-1 = human T-lymphotropic virus type 1. HU and HAM symptoms subsequently remained stable, but
joint pain worsened, and she was referred to Yamano Clinic, Aira City, Kagoshima Prefecture in 2011. More than 10 sites of inflammatory
arthritis were present including large joints, and the symptoms had persisted for more than 6 weeks, suggesting RA. Laboratory tests were
used to confirm: the anti-CCP antibody titer was elevated (208.7 U/mL compared with reference range <4.5 U/mL); rheumatoid factor was
positive (31 IU/mL; reference range 0–15); and CRP levels were elevated. Thus, she fulfilled the 2010 ACR/ EULAR classification criteria for
RA and was diagnosed with RA. Various anti-RA pharmacotherapies were tried, but the patient was unable to continue taking
salazosulfapyridine due to nausea and did not respond sufficiently well to methotrexate (MTX). While the patient also was still taking PSL
to treat the inflammation from HAM/TSP, these steroids did not alleviate the joint inflammation symptoms from RA. Because the RA symptoms
were worsening considerably, with associated bone destruction, the patient was given intravenous TCZ at 8 mg/kg at Yamano clinic in
September 2012. Four weeks later, a second infusion of TCZ was administered. Although the patient subsequently responded well in terms of RA
symptoms, HAM symptoms worsened (bladder and rectal dysfunction, gait disorder), and HU in the right eye recurred. Laboratory tests revealed
that although serum C-reactive protein (CRP) levels (an established marker for RA activity) had dropped precipitously as expected, CSF
levels of CXCL10/IP-10 (a chemokine known to play a role in HAM/TSP pathogenesis and a marker known to be elevated in HAM/TSP patients) had
risen dramatically (Fig. 3). CRP fell from 4.12 mg/dL in August to 0.02 mg/dL in October; CXCL10/IP-10 rose from the last recorded level of
1.90 ng/mL in January to 16.75 ng/mL in October. HTLV-1 proviral load (PVL), on the other hand, remained more or less constant throughout
the year and did not change at all between August (0.48 copies per 100 cells) and October (0.46 copies per 100 cells). Timeline showing
treatments administered and levels of markers recorded before and after administration of tocilizumab. Solid lines represent treatments:
6 mg/wk methotrexate (MTX) in pink, 500 mg/d salazosulfapyridine (SASP) in yellow, 8 mg/d prednisolone (PSL) in light blue, and 2 injections
of 8 mg/kg tocilizumab (TCZ) in orange. Dotted lines represent markers: C-reactive protein (CRP) in blue, CXCL10/IP-10 in red, and proviral
load (PVL) in green. CRP and PVL quantities are graphed according to the left Y axis, whereas CXCL10/IP-10 is measured on the right Y axis.
After administration of TCZ, RA symptoms improved and HAM/TSP symptoms worsened; these clinical responses are noted next to the CRP and
CXCL10/IP-10 levels, respectively, because those quantities are the corresponding markers for disease severity. HAM/TSP = HTLV-1-associated
myelopathy/tropical spastic paraparesis, RA = rheumatoid arthritis. Due to the apparent negative effects of TCZ on the patient's
HTLV-1-related symptoms, the decision was made not to administer TCZ again. Again, steroid eye drops were prescribed to treat the HU, and
mPSL semipulse therapy (500 mg/d for 3 days) was administered to combat the aggravated HAM/TSP symptoms. As a result, the HAM/TSP symptoms
subsided, and the uveitis resolved. The patient remained on oral PSL alone, and 2 months later her RA symptoms had again worsened. She was
administered intravenous abatacept (another biologic used to treat RA) at 250 mg/dose starting in December 2012. This treatment was repeated
2, 4, and every 4 weeks thereafter for 7 months, and RA symptoms were improving. While she was being treated with abatacept, an attempt was
made to reduce the dose of her oral PSL maintenance therapy. Subsequently, her HAM/TSP symptoms again became aggravated. It was unclear
whether or not the abatacept, as another immune-modulating biologic, had played a role in exacerbating the HAM/TSP symptoms, and treatment
with abatacept was discontinued. Since then, we have been struggling to control the RA symptoms using oral PSL at 8 mg/d and MTX at 6 mg/wk.
The patient has so far shown no signs of developing ATL. Here, we described how a patient with both RA and the HTLV-1-associated diseases HU
and HAM/TSP was given 2 biologics, first TCZ and then abatacept, to treat her severe RA symptoms. Treatment with TCZ relieved the RA but
aggravated the HTLV-1-associated symptoms. Laboratory tests revealed trends that corresponded to these clinical observations: reduced serum
CRP and elevated CSF CXCL10/IP-10 following TCZ treatment. Interestingly, PVL remained relatively constant throughout the year, suggesting
that the treatment did not cause the infection to spread but rather stimulated the existing infected cells to increase the level of
inflammation. As a limitation of this study, it should be noted that there was no CXCL10/IP-10 data available for several months immediately
preceding TCZ treatment. This is because, due to the relative difficulty of extracting CSF compared with taking blood, CXCL10/IP-10 was only
measured on the rare occasions it was deemed clinically necessary for diagnostic purposes. This is in contrast to blood tests that were
conducted routinely to monitor disease progression. Thus, it is difficult to say with certainty that CXCL10/IP-10 levels rose in response to
TCZ treatment. Later, it was suspected that abatacept may have also aggravated her HAM/TSP while relieving her RA symptoms, and biologics
were henceforth abandoned for the treatment of this patient. This decision was made even though we were unable to distinguish between the
effects of starting the patient on abatacept and reducing her daily dose of PSL. This represents another limitation of this study. With the
information currently available, it is difficult to deduce the mechanism by which biologics may have exacerbated this patient's
HTLV-1-related symptoms. TCZ works to reduce the proinflammatory activity of IL-6 by binding to the IL-6 receptors as a competitive
inhibitor. There has been a report indicating that this mode of action causes a transient increase in the levels of free IL-6, which may
have pathologic significance. It is well established that IL-6 is involved in the pathogenesis of both HU and HAM/TSP. Thus, it is possible
that this elevated free IL-6 may have downstream effects that increase the inflammatory activity of HTLV-1-infected cells, but further
studies are necessary to conclude whether this theory has merit. It should also be noted that biologics such as TNF-α inhibitors have been
reported to disrupt the blood–ocular barrier, which may cause ocular symptoms. However, this phenomenon has not been observed with TCZ
specifically, according to the literature. Moreover, the symptoms in this case more closely resembled the typical presentation of HU than
the ocular inflammation typically caused by drug-induced autoimmunity or toxicity. When trying to determine why the same drug may ameliorate
and aggravate different inflammatory diseases simultaneously, one naturally begins to contemplate how the origins of inflammation differ
between those diseases. It is therefore interesting to note that some scientists claim that HTLV-1 infection can cause RA. There have been
reports that HTLV-1-infected persons are more likely to develop arthritis and conversely that there is a high seroprevalence of HTLV-1 among
patients with rheumatoid arthritis. However, there are also several reports claiming the opposite, that there is no association between
HTLV-1 and RA. This matter is still up for debate. The purpose of this report is to caution physicians about the use of biologics when
treating HTLV-1-infection patients and to encourage researchers to conduct further studies on this topic. While biologics can be very
effective for treating rheumatic diseases such as RA, this report suggests that there may be a risk of these treatments exacerbating
HTLV-1-related diseases Abbreviations: CRP = C-reactive protein, CXCL = C-X-C motif chemokine, HAM/TSP = HTLV-1-associated
myelopathy/tropical spastic paraparesis, HTLV-1 = human T-lymphotropic virus type 1, HU = HTLV-1 uveitis, IL = interleukin, IP = interferon
gamma-induced protein, mPSL = methyl-prednisolone, MTX = methotrexate, PVL = proviral load, RA = rheumatoid arthritis, SASP =
salazosulfapyridine, TCZ = tocilizumab. This study adhered to the tenets of the Declaration of Helsinki. Written informed consent was
obtained from the patient for publication of this report. The authors have no conflicts of interest to disclose.
