Intercondylar fracture of the distal humerus is an extremely rare injury in children, especially in those under 8 years of age. To our best
knowledge, there have been 55 reported cases of this fracture type in children in the English literature, 12 of which involved children
under 8 years of age. We report a case of intercondylar fracture of the distal humerus in a7-year-old boy fell in a gymnasium, injuring his
left elbow. Closed reduction was initially attempted under fluoroscopic guidance, but anatomic reduction could not be achieved because the
fragments were extremely unstable and irreducible. Considering the displacement and the failure of closed reduction, ORIF through a
posterior approach was performed. Open reduction and double cross-pinning across the medial and lateral condylar fragments were performed
through a posterior approach. Plain radiographs showed a displaced intercondylar fracture of the distal humerus. Arthrography under general
anesthesia showed a severely displaced intra-articular fracture, with rotational displacement of the lateral condyle. Thirteen months after
surgery, there was no functional disturbance or radiographic evidence of avascular necrosis or epiphyseal growth arrest. Open reduction and
double cross-pinning through a posterior approach can be a reliable procedure for intercondylar fracture of the distal humerus in children.
Intercondylar fracture of the distal humerus is an uncommon injury in children. In 1958, Maylahn and Fahey reported that among 300 elbow
injuries in children, 6 (2%) were intercondylar fracture of the distal humerus. Nonoperative treatment for displaced intercondylar fractures
results in complications, including malunion, avascular necrosis, and epiphyseal growth arrest. Therefore, open reduction and internal
fixation (ORIF) is generally recommended for these fractures. We report a case of intercondylar fracture of the distal humerus in a 7-year-
old boy. A 7-year-old boy fell in a gymnasium, injuring his left elbow. At his initial hospital visit, he complained of pain in the left
humerus; the physical exam revealed no neurological findings or impaired blood flow. Plain radiographs showed a displaced intercondylar
fracture of the distal humerus (Fig. 1). The patient's family provided informed consent to perform arthrography and surgery. They
concurrently approved publication of the findings and clinical results. Arthrography under general anesthesia showed a severely displaced
intra-articular fracture, with rotational displacement of the lateral condyle (Fig. 2). Closed reduction was initially attempted under
fluoroscopic guidance, but anatomic reduction could not be achieved because the fragments were extremely unstable and irreducible.
Considering the displacement and the failure of closed reduction, ORIF through a posterior approach was performed. (A, B) Preoperative
anteroposterior and lateral radiographs of the left elbow revealing a displaced intercondylar fracture. (A, B) Preoperative anteroposterior
and lateral arthrographs of the left elbow showing an intra-articular fracture and severely displaced condylar fragments. We made a straight
posterior incision over the elbow to expose the triceps brachiimuscle and ulnar nerve. With the ulnar nerve protected, the triceps brachii
muscle was elevated. We approached the fracture site through the medial and lateral sides of the triceps brachii muscle. We identified the
fracture lines, which revealed a type C1.2 intercondylar fracture according to the Association for Osteosynthesis/Association for the Study
of Internal Fixation fracture classification. Articular integrity was re-established. Initially, the medial condylar fragment was reduced
and fixed to the proximal fragment with 2 Kirschner wires (K-wires). Next the lateral condylar fragment was reduced to the proximal and
medial condylar fragments with 2 K-wires (Fig. 3). Once the distal humeral intercondylar fracture was stabilized with 2 K-wires, the
displacement could be reduced and stable fixation was achieved to maintain the alignment of the humerus (Fig. 4). (A, B) Perioperative
pictures. With the ulnar nerve protected, the triceps brachii muscle was elevated and the fracture site was approached through the medial
and lateral sides of the triceps brachii muscle. We identified the fracture lines, which revealed a type C1.2 intercondylar fracture
according to the AO/ASIF fracture classification. Articular integrity was re-established. AO/ASIF = association for
osteosynthesis/association for the study of internal fixation. (A, B) Postoperative anteroposterior and lateral radiographs of the left
elbow. Double cross-pinning provided stability for the intercondylar fracture of the elbow. The elbow was protected in a long arm cast in
the mid-prone position for 2 weeks. After 2 weeks, the cast was removed and a removal splint was applied for 2 weeks. Simultaneously, range
of motion (ROM) exercise was gradually started. The K-wires were removed 6 weeks postoperatively. The fracture showed radiographic healing
at 2 months. At the final follow-up, 13 months postoperatively, plain radiographs showed adequate healing without any deformity of the elbow
(Fig. 5). Baumann angle, carrying angle, and tilting angle were 75°, 2°, and 41°, respectively (the angles on the contralateral side were
71°, 7°, and 45°, respectively). The ROM of the elbow was 5° to 135°, and the forearm rotation arc was 175°; these values were equal to
those of the contralateral side. According to Flynn's criteria, the ultimate outcome was excellent (Fig. 5). (A, B) Elbow anteroposterior
and lateral radiographs taken 13 months postoperatively confirm fracture healing without any elbow deformity. Intercondylar fracture of the
distal humerus is an uncommon injury in children. To our best knowledge, there have been 55 previously reported cases of this fracture type
in children in the English literature, 12 of which involved children under 8 years of age (Table 1). Most case reports of this fracture have
involved the treatment of children over 8 years of age and adolescents. Reported cases of intercondylar fractures of the distal humerus in
children (12 patients ≤ 8 years of age). To explain the rarity of this kind of fracture, Beghin et al claim that it may often be overlooked
because of the lack of ossification of the distal humerus. According to Ruiz et al, intercondylar fractures of the distal humerus are
usually minimally displaced and are treated conservatively because younger children have a thick layer of periosteum and greater cartilage
component, which are more pliable than bone. Therefore, an articular fracture of the distal humerus may not involve much displacement.
Although diagnosis of this kind of fracture is occasionally difficult because of the skeletal immaturity of the elbow joint in children, the
initial patient history can be helpful. Intercondylar fractures are usually caused by heavy impact to the hand or elbow. Regarding the
mechanism of this fracture, Evans described the olecranon acting as a wedge between the humeral condyles, prying them apart and displacing
them. This mechanism induces characteristic horizontal and vertical fracture lines in the distal humerus, which Maylahn and Fahey described
in 1958; extension of the fracture line into the intercondylar region suggests these fractures. Complementary examinations, such as MRI and
arthrography, are sometimes needed if the diagnosis is difficult. In the present case, because the vertical fracture line extended to the
apex of the distal humerus and the condylar fragment was markedly displaced, intercondylar fracture of the humerus was obvious on
radiographs and arthrographs. Displaced intercondylar fractures result in complications, including malunion, avascular necrosis, and
epiphyseal arrest; therefore, ORIF is generally recommended for these fractures. In 47 out of 55 reported cases, surgery was performed; 37
of these 47 patients underwent ORIF (Table 1). Although there were differences in the degree of displacement among the cases, open reduction
was necessary for displaced intercondylar fractures of the distal humerus to reduce articular displacement. Regarding the surgical approach
for these fractures, the posterior approach was used in 32 out of 37 cases. The advantages of the posterior approach are better
visualization of the fracture fragment and the feasibility of adequate ORIF. The disadvantage of this approach is the possibility of causing
vascular insufficiency and epiphyseal growth disturbance of the distal humerus. In addition, postoperative elbow joint contracture has been
reported in some cases. Papavasiliou and Beslikas described restricted elbow extension after surgery via a posterior approach. In addition,
Gruber and Hudson reported an association between a posterior approach to the elbow joint and elbow joint contracture after surgery for
supracondylar fractures in children. Yamaguchi et al reported that the extraosseous blood supply of the lateral structures, including the
capitellum and the lateral aspect of the trochlea, depends on the posterior perforating vessels, which are frequently dissected with a
posterior approach. Therefore, the posterior approach might result in vascular insufficiency of the distal humerus and subsequent
postoperative complications, such as aseptic necrosis and growth disorder of the humerus when ORIF is performed for articular fractures.
Almost all reported cases of intercondylar fractures of the distal humerus had good surgical outcomes after ORIF via a posterior approach.
However, Papavasiliou and Beslikas reported 1 case of suspected aseptic necrosis of the trochlea of the humerus. In that case, the patient
achieved near complete recovery with no functional disturbance or radiographic evidence of avascular necrosis or epiphyseal growth arrest at
13 months after surgery. However, the long-term follow-up is needed to evaluate clinical outcomes after a posterior approach. Intercondylar
fracture of the distal humerus is a very uncommon injury in children. ORIF should be the treatment of choice for these fractures to prevent
postoperative complications. ORIF through a posterior approach can be the first choice for intercondylar fracture of the distal humerus, and
double cross-pinning can provide reliable fixation. However, long-term follow-up is needed to evaluate the clinical outcomes after ORIF via
a posterior approach for intercondylar fracture of the distal humerus. The authors would like to express our gratitude to all of the staff
at Nippon Medical School Hospital. Abbreviations: K-wires = Kirschner wires, MRI = magnetic resonance imaging, ORIF = open reduction and
internal fixation, ROM = range of motion. The authors have no funding and conflicts of interest to disclose.
