Psoriasis is a chronic inflammatory disease of multifactorial etiology influenced by genetic, immunological, and environmental factors. We
report the case of a patient with psoriasis for more than 25 years who developed hyperuricemia and chronic tophaceous gout with unusual
appearance. In psoriasis, hyperuricemia may occur by increased epidermal cell turnover, which accelerates purine metabolism and has uric
acid as the product of its catabolism. The association of psoriasis with hyperuricemia can trigger the onset of gouty arthritis, and pose a
greater risk of developing other inflammatory comorbidities. Therefore, it is important to periodically investigate uric acid levels in
order to treat changes triggered by hyperuricemia. Psoriasis is a chronic inflammatory disease that can affect the skin, joints, nails, and
scalp. It has a multifactorial etiology, with the participation of genetic, immunological, and environmental factors. Several studies have
demonstrated the role of inflammatory cells and mediators in its pathogenesis. It is defined as a systemic and immune-mediated inflammatory
disease, which can be associated with other inflammatory diseases.1,2 One of these diseases is gout, a disorder caused by the deposition of
urate crystals in joints and periarticular tissues. Its basic feature is hyperuricemia. It is defined by serum uric acid levels above 6.8
mg/dl (404 nmol/L), which is the approximate saturation point of urate solubility under physiological conditions of temperature and pH.3
Uric acid levels beyond blood solubility may form crystals, and consequently, gouty arthritis. This is a potentially destructive disease
that not only deposits crystals within the joints and skin, but can also stimulate inflammatory cytokines and chemotactic factors for
neutrophils.4 We report the case of a patient with psoriasis for more than 25 years who developed hyperuricemia and unsightly gouty tophus
formation. We report a 47-year-old male patient who had psoriasis since he was 19. In 2013, he also reported pain and edema in the right
knee joints and right elbow, interpreted as psoriatic arthritis, for which he received classical systemic treatment with methotrexate. The
cutaneous and joint manifestations evolved with partial improvement, and the patient stopped treatment for two years. He returned to
dermatologic consultation with small erythematous scaly papules on the upper and lower limbs, and erythema and flaky scalp. However, his
main complaint at that time was pain, volume increase, and severely swollen softened lesion on the side of the left foot, with a 6-month
period evolution (Figure 1). Based on the clinical picture, we suspected of mycetoma, phaeohyphomycosis, atypical mycobacteriosis, septic
arthritis, and gout tophaceous. The following tests were performed: complete blood count, blood glucose dosage, lipid profile, foot
radiography, renal ultrasound, and skin biopsy. The material was sent to histopathological and mycological examinations. Seven days after
biopsy, the lesion evolved with fistula formation and drainage of yellow-white exudate and lumpy material (Figure 2). Histological
examination with hematoxylin-eosin showed hyperkeratosis and acanthosis in the epidermis. The dermis revealed thickened collagen with
infiltration of mononuclear cells around the vessels and the presence of amorphous material, with a lightly eosinophilic appearance,
surrounded by coarse bands of collagen tissue (Figure 3). Staining with periodic acid-Schiff (PAS) showed no fungal structures. The direct
examination of the lumpy material sent to medical mycology laboratory showed the presence of spiculated structures compatible with crystal
deposits (Figure 4). There was no fungal growth in the culture medium. Serum levels were the following: uric acid (10.8 mg/dl); glucose (119
mg/dL); total cholesterol (256 mg/dL); and HDL (36 mg/dL). The concentration of uric acid in the 24-hour urine specimen was 1.450 mg/dL
(reference value up to 750 mg/dL). No renal calculi were detected in kidney ultrasound. Left foot radiograph (dorsoplantar view) showed
erosion and sclerosis of the forefoot bones, with preservation of joint spaces and bone density. Based on clinical and laboratory findings,
the diagnosis of chronic tophaceous gout was confirmed. The patient was then sent to a concomitant rheumatologist follow-up, which started
treatment with colchicine (0.5 mg every 12 hours orally). Allopurinol (300 mg orally) was added to the treatment 14 days later. Two months
after the introduction of medications, we observed a normalization of uric acid concentration and a significant reduction of the gouty
tophus lesion and pain. The patient has been followed at dermatology and reumatology clinical setting. Figure 1 Severely swollen and
softened lesion on the side of the left foot with a 6-month period evolution Severely swollen and softened lesion on the side of the left
foot with a 6-month period evolution Figure 2 Seven days after biopsy, the lesion evolved with fistula formation and drainage of yellow-
white exudate and lumpy material Seven days after biopsy, the lesion evolved with fistula formation and drainage of yellow-white exudate and
lumpy material Figure 3 Histological examination with hematoxylin-eosin showed hyperkeratosis and acanthosis in the epidermis. The dermis
revealed thickened collagen with infiltration of mononuclear cells around the vessels and the presence of amorphous material, with a lightly
eosinophilic appearance, surrounded by coarse bands of collagen tissue Histological examination with hematoxylin-eosin showed hyperkeratosis
and acanthosis in the epidermis. The dermis revealed thickened collagen with infiltration of mononuclear cells around the vessels and the
presence of amorphous material, with a lightly eosinophilic appearance, surrounded by coarse bands of collagen tissue Figure 4 The direct
examination of the lumpy material sent to medical mycology laboratory showed the presence of spiculated structures compatible with crystal
deposits The direct examination of the lumpy material sent to medical mycology laboratory showed the presence of spiculated structures
compatible with crystal deposits In psoriasis, hyperuricemia may occur by increased epidermal cell turnover, which accelerates purine
metabolism and has uric acid as the product of its catabolism. Other factors also contribute to this hyperuricemia, such as alcohol
consumption - especially fermented drinks - genetic predisposition, and metabolic syndrome coexistence. In our case, the patient used
alcohol regularly and had a diagnosis of metabolic syndrome. Differential diagnosis of gouty arthritis include septic psoriatic, and
rheumatoid arthritis.5 In the reported case, the involvement of soft tissue with edema and elimination of lumpy material raised the
suspicion of mycetoma and mycobacteriosis. In the acute phase of chronic tophaceous gout, conventional radiography may reveal swelling of
soft tissue and joint effusion. In the chronic phase, intra-articular or para-articular erosions bounded by sclerotic borders can be
identified, as well as osteophytes partially covering the tophi. The joint space is well preserved up to the advanced stage of the disease.
No osteopenia is observed, which is common in other forms of arthritis.6 The increase in uric acid level may also contribute to the onset of
inflammatory systemic comorbidities, and be associated with more severe cases of psoriasis. Gisondi et al. compared uric acid levels of
individuals with psoriasis and control groups matched by age, sex, and body mass index. They found significantly higher values in patients
with psoriasis. By logistic regression analysis, the authors also concluded that psoriasis was the strongest predictor of hyperuricemia in
the studied population, after adjustment for age, sex, and components of the metabolic syndrome.7 In another study, Kown et al. correlated
hyperuricemia with a greater severity of the disease and with higher PASI (Psoriasis Area Severity Index) scores.8 In 2011, Isha et al.
investigated the levels of uric acid in 24 patients before and 12 weeks after the treatment of psoriasis. They demonstrated statistically
significant decreased levels of uric acid in the blood of patients with improvement in psoriasis clinical picture.9 The association of
psoriasis with hyperuricemia can trigger the onset of gouty arthritis and disabling pain, and pose a greater risk of developing other
inflammatory comorbidities, especially cardiovascular. Thus, periodic investigation of uric acid levels and consequent early treatment of
alterations triggered by hyperuricemia are essential.10 Conflict of Interest: None Financial Support: None Work performed at Fundação
Alfredo da Matta (UAM) - Manaus (AM), Brazil.
