Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy is known as Leopard syndrome, which is a mnemonic rule for multiple lentigines (L), electrocardiographic
conduction abnormalities (E), ocular hypertelorism (O), pulmonary stenosis (P), abnormalities of genitalia (A), retardation of growth (R),
and deafness (D). We report the case of a 12-year-old patient with some of the abovementioned characteristics: hypertelorism, macroglossia,
lentigines, hypospadias, cryptorchidism, subaortic stenosis, growth retardation, and hearing impairment. Due to this set of symptoms, we
diagnosed Leopard syndrome. A 12-year-old dark-skinned male patient was admitted at the dermatology service with the following
characteristics: hypertelorism, macroglossia, lentigines, hypospadias, cryptorchidism, subaortic stenosis, growth retardation, and about 50%
of his hearing compromised (Figure 1). Electrocardiogram showed a prolonged PR interval. The patient had a severe anterior open bite (no
contact of the upper and lower front teeth) due to macroglossia (Figure 2). His legal guardian reported that he had been treated for patent
ductus arteriosus and for cryptorchidism, hypospadias, subaortic stenosis, and blue nevus on his arm and back. He had also undergone
tonsillectomy and adenoidectomy. Regarding family background, the patient was the second child of a healthy, nonconsanguineous young couple.
He had a sister and a brother without symptoms. Figure 1 A. Patient’s face (front view), showing lentigines, hypertelorism, and tongue
protrusion. B. Patient’s face (profile view), showing lentigines, hypertelorism, and tongue protrusion A. Patient’s face (front view),
showing lentigines, hypertelorism, and tongue protrusion. B. Patient’s face (profile view), showing lentigines, hypertelorism, and tongue
protrusion Figure 2 Intraoral photograph showing severe anterior open bite due to macroglossia Intraoral photograph showing severe anterior
open bite due to macroglossia Multiple lentigines syndrome is a genetic disorder caused by a mutation. It is characterized by multiple
lentiginous spots associated with specific systemic changes. The term Leopard was originally used by Golin, Anderson, and Blaw in 1971, and
works as a mnemonic rule for the syndrome characterized by multiple lentiginous lesions, abnormal electrocardiogram, ocular hypertelorism,
pulmonary stenosis, genital and reproductive abnormalities, growth retardation, and deafness.1 Mutations in PTPN11, RAF1, or BRAF genes are
related to multiple lentigines syndrome. Approximately 90% of individuals with this syndrome show mutations in the PTPN11 gene.2 The Leopard
syndrome (LS) and Noonan syndrome are part of the "rasopathies" group, a new family of autosomal dominant syndrome caused by mutations in
the germline.3 A rather current synonym is called NSL, or Noonan syndrome with lentigines, that shows the spectrum of rasopathies.4 As not
all systemic changes develop simultaneously, Rizun et al.5 suggested a minimal set of characteristics to diagnose this syndrome: apart from
lentigines, at least two other systemic changes must be present, or just three non-lentigine characteristics. The patient of this case
showed, in addition to lentiginous lesions, abnormal electrocardiogram, cryptorchidism, subaortic stenosis, ocular hypertelorism, growth
retardation, and hearing impairment. They all led to the diagnosis of LS. Lentigines is the most significant characteristic of this
syndrome.6 It develops as multiple well-defined brownish blotches of approximately 5 mm in diameter, mostly on the neck, upper extremities,
trunk, and below the knees._ENREF_6 Face, scalp, palms, plants, and genitals are also affected, but the mucosa is invariably preserved.7,8
Cardiac exam is one of the most relevant tools to assess LS patients and to control the disorder, and should always be taken into account.
LS usually appears in early childhood; if the cardiopathy occurs, disease requires monitoring, as it can be progressive, and might vary in
patients in need of treatment with antibiotic prophylaxis before any invasive procedure, in order to decrease the risk of developing
bacterial endocarditis.9,10 Although rare, LS should always be taken into account in patients with multiple lentiginous lesions and cardiac
abnormalities. Physical examination and thorough systemic research are essential. Sensorineural hearing loss may occur later, but should be
periodically monitored during childhood and adolescence, as late diagnosis may hinder the child's psychomotor development and learning.
Conflict of Interest: None Financial Support: None Study conducted at the Pontifícia Universidade Católica de Minas Gerais (PUC Minas) -
Belo Horizonte (MG, and at the Universidade Estadual do Sudoeste da Bahia (UESB) - Itapetinga (BA), Brazil.
