Behcet’s disease (BD) is a systemic disorder of unknown process resulting from systemic vasculitis. The pulmonary involvements in BD are
uncommon. Furthermore, in the female, involvement of the pulmonary artery is quite rare. There were a few cases of female patients with BD
with pulmonary artery aneurysm confirmed by pulmonary artery angiogram. In this article, we report a case of BD, combined with pulmonary
artery aneurysm, confirmed by pulmonary angiogram and treated by surgery in a Korean female patient. Behcet’s disease (BD) is known to be a
systemic disease of unknown process affecting multi-organs with a variety of clinical manifestations, which are a result of systemic
vasculitis caused by the deposition of immune complex onto the eye, skin, joint and central nervous system1). But the pulmonary
involvements, which include pulmonary artery aneurysm (PAA), pulmonary infiltrates and pulmonary infarction, in BD are uncommon2).
Furthermore, in the female, involvement of pulmonary artery is quite rare3). There were a few cases of female BD patients with PAA reported,
but there was no report in Korea. In this article, we report a rare case of BD, combined with PAA, confirmed by pulmonary angiogram in a
Korean female patient. A 21-year-old Korean woman had suffered from dyspnea and cough for the past 3 months. She was healthy until 2 years
ago, when she first noticed both knee joints to swell and subside spontaneously. She also experienced intermittent both lower leg pain. Two
months ago, chest P-A showed heterogenous, hazy, streaky densities on both lower lung fields and a well-marginated homogenous squared shape
of mass-like density on the right middle lung (Fig. 1). She was treated with isoniazid, rifampin and pyrazinamide under the diagnosis of
pulmonary tuberculosis, which was not confirmed by microbiologic study, at a private clinic. After 2 months of anti-tuberculous drugs, the
chest X-ray revealed much improved infiltrations on both lower lung fields and right middle lung, but with newly developed lobulated, round
homogenous density, with 4×4 cm in diameter, at the left hilar region (Fig. 2). She was transferred to our hospital for the evaluation of
the left hilar lung mass. The patient was single, non-smoker and non-drinker. There was no history of pulmonary tuberculosis. She denied
fever, sweats, hemoptysis, headache, otalgia and otorrhea, and bladder or bowel dysfunction. The temperature was 36.8 °C, the pulse was 68
and the respiration was 18. The blood pressure was 130/80 mmHg. On physical examination, she appeared pale and chronically ill. She had
multiple ulcerations on lower lip and oral cavity near right premolar teeth, but not on genital area. The ophthalmologic study showed no
abnormal findings. The lung, heart and abdomen were normal. The skin examination revealed erythematous, tender nodules on wrist and both
pretibial areas, which were pathologically proven as erythema nodosum. A gynecologist notified the aphthous ulceration of labia minora. The
remaining physical examination was normal. The urine was normal. The hematocrit was 27 percent; the white-cell count was 9,000/mm3, with 68
percent neutrophils, 29 percent lymphocytes, 2 percent monocytes and 1 percent eosinophils. The ESR was 28 mm/hour. The shape of RBC was
microcytic and hypochromic. The urea nitrogen was 18 mg%, the glucose 80 mg%, the serum alanine aminotransferase 20 IU, the alkaline
phosphatase 56 U. The VDRL was negative. The arterial blood gas analysis showed PH; 7.40, PaCO2; 41 mmHg, PaO2; 96 mmHg. An
electrocardiogram was normal. The perfusion scan showed lobar perfusion defect of left lower lobe and focal segmental perfusion defect of
right lower lobe. The ventilation scan showed round single defect in left hilar area. The computerized tomogram of thorax revealed 5×5cm-
sized, round, mass with surrounding low density, suggesting PAA with thrombosis in left lung (Fig. 3). Ascending venogram of lower leg
showed diffuse obstruction of right femoral vein. The digital subtraction pulmonary angiogram revealed huge dilatation of left main
pulmonary artery, proximal to the obstructed pulmonary artery (Fig. 4). Ten days after admission, blood-tinged sputum occurred abruptly at
early morning. The patient was treated with steroids for 14 days without improvement of hemoptysis. During the next 6 weeks, although she
was given steroids persistently, the left hilar lesions grew to large mass with diameter of 5 cm. We decided to excise the aneurysmal mass.
Macroscopic examination of the excised lobe showed saccular dilation of pulmonary artery surrounded by the underventilated pulmonary
parenchyma. On section, the aneurysmal dilatation was 5 cm in diameter and lined with laminated old blood clots. The main histopathological
findings were located in the arterial walls. The arterial wall was markedly destructed with minimal fibrous thickening, medial destruction,
marked infiltration of inflammatory cells, predominantly neutrophils. A large area of aneurysmal wall was necrotic, ulcerated and attached
by thrombus. On special stain, elastic lamina was marked destructed, fragmented and frequently lost. There were multifocal infarctions, both
in parenchymal and subpleural portion. She was treated with maintenance prednisolone during 1 year after lobectomy, but she noted sudden
massive hemoptysis and eventually died. The underlying causes of PAA without arteriovenous communication are infection (mycotic), structural
cardiac abnormalities, structural vascular abnormalities including Marfan’s syndrome and BD, pulmonary hypertension and trauma4). In this
case, BD is the cause of PAA because of the presence of recurrent oral and genital ulceration and skin lesion (erythema nodosum) which
fulfill the diagnostic criteria of BD5). Of 137 and 316 patients with BD, 38 (21%) and 69 (28%) patients had vascular involvement,
respectively6,7). Both studies showed marked male and vein predominance. Therefore, there were a few cases of female patients with BD
combined with PAA confirmed by pulmonary angiogram3,8,9). So, it is valuable to report this rare case of female BD with PAA confirmed by
angiogram. The pulmonary manifestations, including recurrent episodes of dyspnea, cough, chest pain and hemoptysis, occur in 5% to 10% of
patients with BD10). The major symptom is hemoptysis, which is the result of pulmonary embolism evoked by deep thrombophlebitis or pulmonary
thrombophlebitis11) or communication between PAA and its related bronchus3). In this case, the first manifestation of blood-tinged sputum
may be related with pulmonary embolism secondary to deep vein thrombosis which were proven by lung scan and RI venogram. The massive
hemoptysis resulting in death may be rupture of the main aneurysm to related bronchus. Although the CT findings of thorax have not been well
documented, aneurysm with or without thrombus, irregular configuration of peripheral vessels, peripheral opacities in the lower zones and
enlarged peripheral arteries were reported3,8,11,12). In this case, CT scan with contrast media showed well-opacified round arterial lumen
with eccentric soft tissue mass which suggested thrombus within aneurysm. We think that the thrombus within aneury sm may be related with
stasis of blood flow due to obstructed distal arterial lumen by vasculitis. Pulmonary angiogram is gold standard in the diagnosis of PAA4).
The angiogram might deteriorate pulmonary disease resulting in death within one year10,11). This deterioration was the result of a puncture
of the inflamed arterial wall12), severe ill state and pulmonary catheterization itself11). So, it is doubtful to perform pulmonary
angiogram for demonstration of aneurysm and vascular change. Fortunately, we did not find any deterioration of pulmonary symptoms after
angiogram in this case. In future, high resolution computerized tomogram and dynamic CT may replace angiogram in confirmative or routine
diagnostic modality of aneurysm without any complication. The steroid, with or without immunosuppressive agents, is the first line therapy
in BD with lung involvements. But the long-term effect of steroid is not defined, in spite of the short-term effect of steroid being
reported to be very good12). Furthermore, patients with PAA died due to massive hemoptysis by rupture of aneurysm during treatment with
massive steroids3,13). If the aneurysm dilates, the dilating force increases and in turn, results in the rupture of aneurysm4). Thus, we
used steroid in management of PAA without improvement. Eventually, we performed lobectomy due to the fear of rupture of the aneurysm. At 2
months prior to admission, chest P-A shows heterogenous, hazy, streaky densities on both lower lung fields and well-marginated homogenous
squared shape of mass-like density on right middle lung. Chest P-A, at admission, reveals much improved infiltrations on both lower lung
fields and right middle lung, but newly developed lobulated round homogenous density with 4×4 cm in diameter at left hilar region. The
computerized tomogram of thorax reveals 5×5 cm-sized, round, mass with surrounding low density suggesting pulmonary artery aneurysm with
thrombosis in left lung. The digital subtraction pulmonary angiogram reveals dilated left inferior pulmonary artery (indicated by arrow-
heads) proximal to the obstructed pulmonary artery and well-preserved left upper lung (indicated by arrows).
