Several studies have revealed an excess of malformations in children with certain malignancies. A few environmental causes have been
identified which may damage the foetus and lead to malformation and cancer. However, most of the numerous recognised cancer/malformation
syndromes are genetically determined. This report describes a case-control study of 555 newly diagnosed children with cancer and 1,110
matched controls, chosen from general practitioner lists (GP controls) and hospital admissions (H controls). Their parents were interviewed
on topics of possible aetiological significance and medical records were checked to confirm reports at interview. The numbers of congenital
malformations in the index and GP control children, and the relatives of the index children, the GP and H controls are described. There were
more children with malformations among the cases (60/555) than among the GP controls (27/555), P < 0.001. The abnormalities in the cases
included eight with specific chromosomal/genetic conditions (e.g. Down's syndrome, XY gonadal dysgenesis, Von Recklinghausen's
neurofibromatosis, Goldenhar's syndrome) whereas only one GP control child had a chromosomal defect (P < 0.05). Five case children but no GP
controls had neural tube defects; this is not statistically significant. No excess of malformations was found in the siblings of cases
compared with GP and H control siblings. Case mothers had a small excess of malformations (22/555) compared with GP controls (8/555), P <
0.05. Among more distant relatives the results were difficult to interpret because of the relatively small numbers in the diagnostic
subgroups and because of apparent under reporting in grandparents, but no striking differences were seen between case and control relatives.
The excess of malformations found in children with cancer, compared with controls, without a similar excess of malformations in their close
relatives may indicate that in some (perhaps very roughly one in 20) cases antenatal events may lead both to the malformation and the
malignancy.
