Behcet’s syndrome is a multi-systemic and chronic disorder that affects many organs. It has been suggested that the diagnosis was based on
the presence of the ‘major’ and ‘minor’ clinical criteria. When thromobophlebitis, arthritis, central nervous system or gastrointestinal
lesions are also present, Behcet’s syndrome will be thought to be present in the appropriate geographic area. We report a case of superior
vena cava syndrome caused by Behcet’s disease in a 40-year-oid man with recurrent oral aphthous ulcers and skin rashes on the anterior chest
wall. There were multiple thrombosis of the superior vena cava, innominate and subclavian veins. This patient also had a solitary cecal
ulcer with an ileocecal fistula and downhill varix. The chest CT, veno-cavography, pulmonary angiography and colon study were taken and
follow-up was performed. Behcet’s syndrome was described as a clinical syndrome with aphthous oral ulcers, genital ulceration and eye
involvement. As it affects many other organs, Behcet’s syndrome is now recognized as a systemic disease1). The clinical characteristics of
Behcet’s syndrome are thought to be caused by vasculitis that principally affects veins, venules and capillaries. But there were no
pathognomic findings and the diagnosis was based on the presence of the ‘major’ and ‘minor’ criteria, e.g. oral ulcers, genital ulcers,
ocular lesions, skin lesions, arthropathies, gastrointestinal lesions and cardiovascular lesions2). Although there were no definite symptoms
of major criteria, thrombophlebitis, arthritis, central nervous system or gastrointestinal lesions are also present and Behcet’s syndrome is
thought to be present in the appropriate geographic area3). We report a patient with Behcet’s syndrome having recurrent oral ulceration,
cutaneous pustules, as well as non-deforming arthritis and ileocecal fistula presenting SVC syndrome and down-hill esophageal varix. In
November 1995, a 40-year-old man presented with a four-month history of intermittent lower abdominal pain and neck vein engorgement. He had
had recurrent oral ulcers for 7 years. His face was plethoric and the external jugular vein was markedly engorged. There were multiple
maculoerythematous lesions, about 2–3mm in diameter, on his face, neck and anterior chest. There were distended collateral vessels on the
anterior chest wall and abdomen. Chest radiograph revealed a slightly widened superior mediastinum, suggesting a pathologic problem of the
supenor mediastinum(Fig. 1). Initial computed tomography(CT) scan, following a bolus injection of intravenous contrast medium, demonstrated
obstruction of the superior vena cava with thrombosis and pleural effusion of the right hemithorax(Fig. 2). Abdominal sonogram did not show
any sign of obstruction of the inferior vena cava or portal vein. Gastroscopy revealed a mild degree of esophageal varix(Form 1, white
color, Locus superior, negative red color sign). Pleural tapping was not taken because the patient did not desire admission or further
diagnostic studies to be done. In February 1996, he was admitted to the hospital. In the ensuing twelve weeks, he felt less plethoric and
had mildly collapsed neck vein engorgement. On examination, he had several painful aphthous oral ulcers, 2–8mm in diameter, with a central
yellowish necrotic base on the tongue. Neck vein engorgement was somewhat decreased. He had painful swelling of the right knee joint. The
pathergy skin test was negative. Hematological and biochemical tests were as follows: white blood cell count was 7,200/mm3, hemoglobin
12.6g/dL, platelet 320,000/mm3. Erythrocyte sedimentation rate was 39mm/hr and C-reactive protein was negative. The prothrombin time and
activated partial thromboplastin time were normal. The rheumatoid factors, antinuclear antibody, antinuclear DNA, anticardiolipin antibody,
lupus anticoagulant, antiphospholipid antibody and antineutophil cytoplasmic autoantibody were negative. There was no proteinuria and
hematuria. Protein C, protein S, factor VIII, fibrinogen and antithrombin III were all normal. Follow-up CT scan demonstrated decreased
pleural effusion, but newly developed consolidation at the left lower lobe territory, 3×1.5×3cm size in diameter, suggested focal pulmonary
infarction(Fig. 3). SVC obstruction and many collateral vessels still persisted. Venocavogram was obtained after injection of 40ml contrast
materials(Ultravist, Scherring, Germany) through both basilic veins. The venacavogram showed complete occlusion of the SVC, right subclavian
vein and partial occlusion of the left subclavian vein. Subsequent pulmonary angiography was normal. The colon study and colonoscopy
revealed solitary cecal ulcer with an irregular mucosal change of the ileocecal area and ileocecal fistula(Fig. 5). A final diagnosis of
Behcet’s syndrome with superior vena cava syndrome and ileocecal fistula was made and we started medical treatment with high dose
sulfasalazine and azathioprine. He showed mild decompression of neck vein engorgement and disappearance of right abdominal pain, but still
plethoric. Behcet’s disease is a multi-systemic disorder having orogenital ulcers, uveitis, cutaneous, arthritic, neurological, vascular and
intestinal manifestations. This syndrome affects mainly men aged 20–30 years. Because Behcet’s disease has various clinical manifestations,
it is difficult to diagnose1,2). Diagnosis of Behcet’s disease is based only on clinical findings, because there are no pathognomonic
laboratory or histopathological diagnostic criteria for this syndrome. The histological hallmark of Behcet’s disease is a nonspecific
vasulitis of the arteries, veins, arterioles, venules, and capillaries of both systemic circulations4). The pulmononary vasculitis
characteristic of Behcet’s syndrome is usually necrotizing, and histopathologic findings indicate perivascular infiltration by lymhocytes.
The syndrome characteristically affects the large vessels(mainly the veins such as SVC and innominate vein)5,6). In this case, obstruction
of the SVC and subclavian veins were confirmed by the venocavogram. Right pleural effusion, which was not confirmed by pleural tapping, was
thought to be transudate resulting from increased high venous pressure due to obstruction of the azygose vein and vena cava. Downhill
esophageal varix with no evidence of portal hypertension is thought to arised by the same mechanism. Air space consolidation, which was seen
on the CT scan, was thought to be an infarction or infiltration. But this was not identified by angiography. The previous post-mortem study
reported that the pulmonary infact, with no evidence of peripheral venous thrombosis, resulted from an in situ thrombosis rather than an
embolism. In situ venous thrombosis secondary to vasculitis probably plays an important role in the development of the major vessel venous
thrombosis seen in Behcet’s syndrome5). The gastrointestinal manifestation of this syndrome resembles that in Crohn’s disease, but
granulomas are not found and free perforation is common7). Microscopically, vasculitis, often of the leucocytoclastic variety, is a common
multi-systemic nature of Behcet’s disease usually allowing its recognition. In this case, there was a fistula between the cecum and terminal
ileum. Endoscopic biopsy at the cecum shows massive infiltration of inflammatory cells without granuloma and crypt abscess. There were some
case reports about Behcet’s syndrome with SVC syndrome in Korea8), but there was no evidence of gastrointestinal involvement. This case has
typical solitary ulcer with ileal fistula near the ileocecal valve. Also, there was downhill inverted superior esophageal varix. The
downhill superior esophageal varix had been described in thoracic goiter, lung cancer, mediastinal fibrosis, tumors, superior vena cava
ligation, subclavian vein thrombosis and congestive heart failure. There were few cases of downhill superior esophageal varix due to
Behcet’s disease in the literature9). Treatment of Behcet’s syndrome is symptomatic and empirical. Mucous membrane involvement may respond
to topical corticosteroids. The arthritis responds to rest and analgesics. Thrombophlebitis is treated with antiplatelet agents. But
uveitis, central nervous system involvement and pulmonary disease usually require corticosteroid and immunosuppressives. Other medications
which have been tried include azathioprine, chlorambucil, colchicine, levamisole, cyclosporine and fibrinolysis-enhancing drugs, such as
stanozolol and phenformin10). However, there is little data on the use of the drugs specifically for the pulmonary disease of Behcet’s
syndrome. Therapy for gastrointestinal Behcet’s disease is identical to that of inflammatory bowel disease, especially high dose
sulfasalazine11). Chest radiography shows slightly widened superior mediastinum and laterally shifted dome of the right hemidiaphragm.
Initial contrast enhanced CT scan shows filling defect in the superior vena cava suggesting thrombosis (long arrow) and rich collateral
veins in the mediastinum(arrow head) and chest wall. Pleural effusion is seen in the right hemithorax. Follow-up CT after 3 months from
initial CT scan shows newly developed consolidation in the left posterior basal segment(long arrow). The pleural effusion in the right
hemithorax is decreased. Superior veno-cavogram shows complete occlusion of both superior subclavian veins(long arrow) and rich collateral
veins in the chest wall and mediastinum. The thoracic duct and azygose and hemiazygose veins are opacified by reverse flow of contrast
medium toward the subphrenic veins. Double contrast colon study shows ileocecal fistula and irregular shaped cecal ulceration.
