Behçet’s disease is a chronic multisystemic disorder involving many organs and characterized by recurrent oral and genital ulcers and
relapsing iritis. A case of BD with large vein thrombosis involving superior and inferior vena cava is presented. Large vein thrombosis in
BD is not commonly developed and most commonly observed in the inferior or superior vena cava. A review of the literature emphasizes the
rarity of the combined superior and inferior vena caval occlusion. Existence of extensive large vein occlusion in BD is associated with
limited therapy and poor prognosis. Behçet’s disease (BD) is a multisystem vasculitis, probably autoimmune in origin. It is characterized by
systemic organ involvement, including mucocutaneous, ophthalmic, neurologic, cardiovascular, pulmonary, urogenital, gastrointestinal,
musculoskeletal system. Vascular involvement in BD is not uncommon and closely related with the prognosis of BD. BD associated with large
vascular lesions is called “Angio-Behçet’s syndrome”. Venous occlusions are frequently observed, most commonly in the inferior or superior
vena cava1). Occlusion of both the superior and inferior vena cava was seen and reported1,2). The treatment of BD with vascular lesions
remains empirical and palliative, but usually resistant to all types of treatment. In cases of venous occlusion, the prognosis is relatively
favorable due to the development of collateral veins3). More extensive venous occlusions have further limited therapy and less favorable
outcome4). To avoid serious vascular complications in BD, early detection and treatment of peripheral vein thrombosis are necessary for
preventing propagation of the thrombus. A 26-year-old woman was admitted for dyspnea, coughing and generalized edema for the last 5 months.
She had a symptoms complex of recurrent oral aphtous ulcer, genital ulcer, erythema nodosum like skin lesions, uveitis and positive Pathergy
test, and was diagnosed to have BD according to the diagnostic criteria proposed by the International Study Group for Behçet’s disease5).
She gave no history of smoking, consumption of alcohol or any drugs. Two years ago, bypass surgery was performed due to deep vein thrombosis
of left lower extremity (Fig. 1, 2). At that time, she did not follow-up and was not prescribed for any medication. On physical examination,
the patient was uncomfortable and slightly pale. She became dyspneic on supine for the examination. No rash or lymphadenopathy was found.
There was marked edema over the face, neck, both shoulders, anterior chest and lower extremities. Also, collateral vessels formation in the
anterior chest wall and abdomen were noticed. Diminished breath sounds were present over both lung fields. The abdomen was distended and
non-tender, but a fluid wave and shifting dullness were present. The liver was palpable 5 cm below the costal margin, but the spleen was not
felt and no masses were palpable. Blood tests showed that the white blood cell count was 10,600 per cubic millimeter, hemoglobin 11.7 g/dL,
hematocrit was 33 percent, and the platelet count was 45,000 per cubic millimeter. The erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) was 35 mm/hour.
The values for blood chemistries were all within the normal limits. She had no family history of clotting abnormalities and the routine
coagulation tests (prothrombin time and activated partial-thromboplastin times, bleeding time) and protein C, protein S, antithrombin III
levels were within normal range. Antinuclear antibody (ANA), anticardiolipin antibody, lupus anticoagulant and rheumatoid factor (RF) were
negative. C3, C4 were within normal limits. IgG, IgA and IgM were 587 mg/dl, 154 mg/dl and 214mg/dl, respectively. The pleural fluid showed
characteristic findings of transudate. An X-ray film of the chest showed bilateral pleural effusion. Computed tomographic (CT) scan of the
thorax (Fig. 3) demonstrated large amounts of bilateral pleural effusion and SVC occlusion with prominent collateral vessels at the chest
wall, both axillary areas and within the mediastinum. Abdominal CT (Fig. 4) showed ascites and obliterated IVC, except for the short segment
near the heart. Also, many collateral vessels were noted in the splenic hilar area, hepatosplenic ligament, retroperitoneum, mesentery, both
perihilar areas of kidney, both paravertebral areas, perirectal area and the whole abdominal wall. Multiple round and wedge shaped, non-
enhancing hypodense lesions suggest multiple liver infarction and diffuse hepatomegaly and mild splenomegaly were noted. The patient was
treated with prednisolone, diuretics (furosemide) and anticoagulant and antiplatelet agents. Intermittent therapeutic thoracentesis of both
pleural effusions were done. However, both pleural effusions were not improved. So, chest tube insertion was performed for drainage of
refractory pleural effusion. Thereafter, her general condition did not change and dyspnea was slowly progressed and aggravated. Hypotension,
anuria and shock developed and progressed despite medical supportive therapy, and the patient died. Behçet’s disease is a multisystem
vasculitis with mucocutaneous, ophthalmic, neurologic, cardiovascular, pulmonary, urogenital, gastrointestinal, musculoskeletal involvement
and other features. Vascular involvement in BD is not uncommon, with an overall incidence ranging from 7% to 60%, and any large or small
artery, vein or organ may be involved in an unpredictable combination6). Vascular involvement in BD is seen more frequently in male
patients7). BD associated with large vascular lesions is called “Angio-Behçet’s syndrome” and four types of vascular lesions are recognized:
arterial occlusion, aneurysms, venous occlusion and varices. Vascular lesions more commonly involve the venous system than the arterial
systems (incidence of venous system involvement between 18–24% in BD)8). The most frequent presentation of venous lesion of BD is
superficial thrombophlebitis and thrombosis9). Venous occlusions are frequently observed, most commonly in the inferior or superior vena
cava1). Thrombosis of the superior or inferior vena cava in BD has been recognized and frequently reported10,11) The incidence of superior
and inferior vena caval occulsions reported in the literature are 9.0% and 2.5%, respectively, and they manifested as superior vena cava
syndrome or lower limb edema or would be life-threatening if not treated promptly2). Occlusion of both the superior and inferior vena cavae
was seen and reported12). The common underlying histopathologic lesion in BD is nonspecific vasculitis which could involve any systemic
vessel. The pathologic process in the wall of the blood vessels in BD is a result of immune complex deposition, leading to complement
fixation and ploymorphonuclear leukocyte activation6). The characteristics of vasculitis are perivascular infiltrations of inflammatory
cells, proliferation of vascular endothelial cells, some tissue necrosis and loss of vascular elastic fibers. The small and middle-sized
arteries and veins are mainly involved and the vascular involvement frequently causes arterial aneurysms, arterial occlusions, venous
occlusions and varix formations11,12). There are different explanations about the pathogenesis of the vascular complications and the
tendency for thrombosis in BD. Several investigators conduct hypercoagulable state account for clinical signs such as vascular lesions in
patients with BD. Activation of platelets and coagulation system by the impairment of the intima because of the vasculitis, immunological in
origin, results in hypercoagulabe conditions. Some authors suggest that increased blood viscosity and decreased prostacyclin are important
factors in the formation of thrombosis13). It is claimed that prostacyclin synthesis is significantly low in patients of BD with vascular
involvement. Also, some suggested that the decreased activity of the fibrinolytic system may be the probable cause of thrombosis14,15).
There is a question as to whether some proteins related to coagulation are simply increased as acute phase reactants or as to whether there
exists a hypercoagulable state in BD. Pleural effusion with or without associated chest pain is usually attributed to pulmonary infarction
or an infectious process and vasculitis of the pleura. In this patient, both pleural effusion and ascites may be contributed to the
retrograde stasis and increased hydrostatic pressure in central large venous systems. Nonspecific findings of the pleural tissues may
provide evidence that increased venous hydrostatic pressure, not pleural involvement by BD, contribute to the development of both pleural
effusion. The treatment of BD with vascular lesions remains to be solved. Treatment varies from antiaggregant agents to intravenous
anticoagulation, but is usually resistant to all types of treatment. Prednisone and heparin are still used frequently in the treatment of
BD. Colchicine has been recommended, chiefly because of its antichemotactic activity. Combination of these three agents is believed to be
the best therapy. Some authors suggest that fibrinolytic agents could be used in patients with venous thrombosis, but aspirin treatment
should not be offered due to low levels of prostacyclin in BD. The role of cytotoxic agents, such as cyclosporine-A, azathioprine and
cyclophosphamide in treatment of vascular lesions of BD, is not clear. In patients with severe collateral insufficiency, surgical
intervention may be considered. The results of reconstructive vascular surgery in patients with BD are not good for venous or arterial
lesions as there is a high incidence of reocclusion. So, surgical treatment should be avoided in venous lesions unless it is absolutely
necessary16). In cases of venous occlusion, the prognosis is not always poor due to the development of collateral veins and
recanalitation3). But, arterial lesions have a less favorable outcome, as aneurysms may rupture, leading to death and more extensive venous
lesion has limited therapy and relatively poor prognosis4). To improve the quality of life and avoid serious vascular complications, every
patient with BD should be followed routinely by noninvasive vascular imaging and laboratory techniques to evaluate the arterial and venous
system. Early detection and aggressive treatment of peripheral vein thrombosis are crucial for preventing propagation of the thrombus to the
large vascular system. Venography of left lower extremity. Left iliac vein is obliterated and multiple collateral veins (arrow) are shown.
Venography of left lower extremity. Popliteal vein is abruptly obliterated (arrow) and superficial femoral vein is not opacified. Multiple
collateral vessels are shown. CT of chest. SVC and brachiocephalic veins are obliterated (arrow) and multiple collateral vessels are
opacified at anterior chest wall and both axilla. Abdominal CT. IVC is filled with low attenuate thrombus (arrow). Multiple collaterals are
noted at the anterior abdominal wall, hepatogastric and hepatosplenic ligament area.
