Pregnancy was once considered a contraindication to laparoscopic cholecystectomy and appendectomy. The progression of laparoscopic
techniques has resulted in a continued reassessment of laparoscopic procedures during pregnancy. There still exists some controversy as to
the safety of laparoscopic procedures during pregnancy. This paper reviews our series of six pregnant patients treated laparoscopically for
appendicitis and cholecystitis. Charts were reviewed of all pregnant patients who underwent laparoscopic cholecystectomy or appendectomy at
St Clare's Hospital Schenectady, New York between 1992 and 1996. Six patients were identified. Patients and obstetricians were contacted to
investigate the results of the pregnancy. All patients and fetuses survived the procedure. Two patients delivered prematurely but remote
from the operative procedure. All infants were healthy postpartum. One patient underwent an elective abortion as she had planned. The
abortion was remote from the surgical procedure. Our series adds to the growing evidence that laparoscopic cholecystectomy and laparoscopic
appendectomy can be performed safely during pregnancy. Acute cholecystitis and appendicitis are the most common intra-abdominal emergencies
that complicate pregnancy.1–4 They are associated with significant rates of spontaneous abortion, premature labor, and fetal mortality.1,5
Historically, appendicitis and cholecystitis were managed medically until postpartum when surgery could be performed with minimal maternal
risk and no fetal risk.2 Acute worsening, or severe illness required prompt surgical intervention with laparotomy. Over the past seven
years, laparoscopic surgery has evolved as a potential treatment option for pregnant patients. Until recently, it had been avoided during
pregnancy.2,5–10 This paper reports on six pregnant patients successfully treated with laparoscopic appendectomy or cholecystectomy and
describes the risks and benefits of this new management technique. Charts were reviewed at our institution of all pregnant patients who
underwent laparoscopic cholecystectomy or appendectomy. Six patients were identified. Our first case occurred in 1992 and the most recent in
1996. The six procedures were performed by two surgeons. Patients and obstetricians were contacted by phone to investigate the results of
the pregnancy. An open laparoscopic approach with the Hasson trocar rather than the Veress needle was utilized in each case. There were no
uterine injuries. All six patients and fetuses survived the procedure. A summary of the operative procedures are contained in Table 1. Two
patients delivered prematurely but remote from the procedure. All infants were healthy postpartum. One patient subsequently underwent an
elective abortion as she had planned. The abortion was remote from the operative procedure. Summary of Operative Procedures PROM - premature
rupture of membranes ETOP - elective termination of pregnancy Pregnant patients present many unique diagnostic and therapeutic concerns. The
physiologic alterations of pregnancy, if not recognized or understood, may delay patient presentations, diagnosis, and the initiation of
treatment. This delay translates into increased fetal mortality, ranging from rates of 5% in cases of acute appendicitis to 20% in cases of
advanced disease or perforation.11,12 Similarly, increased maternal and fetal risk has been observed in cases when symptoms have been
present for more than 24 hours prior to surgery.11 Once a diagnosis has been made, there are additional concerns associated with performing
surgery. The increased incidence of preterm labor and miscarriage observed with standard cholecystectomy and appendectomy in pregnancy has
been a valid basis for concern.6 In approximately two of every thousand pregnancies, however, some form of nongynecological surgery is
required and successfully performed.13 Preventing unnecessary fetal injury during surgery is a key consideration. In our series of six cases
of laparoscopic appendectomy and cholecystectomy, all patients and fetuses survived the procedure. Two patients delivered prematurely but
remote from the operative procedure. In the following discussion we briefly discuss the diagnosis and medical management of appendicitis and
cholecystitis in the pregnant patient, and focus on a review of the advantages and risks of laparoscopic appendectomy and cholecystectomy
during pregnancy. The diagnosis of intra-abdominal inflammatory processes during pregnancy is frequently complex.5,19 Appendicitis during
pregnancy is falsely diagnosed and has negative explorations in 35 to 50 percent of cases.7,20,22,24 The significance of abdominal pain,
nausea, vomiting, and a leukocytosis are difficult to assess because of their expected occurrence in normal pregnancy.5,7,21,23 The finding
of right lower quadrant pain at McBurney's point is also less helpful because uterine growth displaces the appendix and cecum superiorly in
the abdomen. The clinician also experiences limitations in his or her choice of radiologic diagnostic tools. Radiologic studies such as
abdominal films, urograms, and upper gastrointestinal series all expose the fetus to radiation and the potential for fetal malformation,
oncogenesis, and death.22 Ultrasonography may be used safely, although diagnostic limitations exist. The medical management of cholecystitis
and appendicitis during pregnancy typically includes fetal monitoring, intravenous hydration, analgesia, and antibiotics.3,4,14 Medical
management during pregnancy carries a significant risk of treatment failure7 (approximately 35% of cholecystitis cases), prolonged hospital
admissions, and pregnancy loss.9,14,16,25 Treatment complications or failures, as evidenced by recurrent bouts of cholecystitis or biliary
colic, necessitate surgery.2,4,5,18,23 Despite the emergence, increased use, and success of laparoscopy, an open surgical approach has
remained the procedure of choice for managing appendicitis and cholecystitis during pregnancy. Similar to medical management, surgical
treatment and its associated therapies may result in unwanted adverse effects.7 Surgical procedures in pregnant patients have been
associated with a 10 to 15 percent increased risk of premature labor.22 Open cholecystectomies and appendectomies have been known to
increase the incidence of preterm labor as well as miscarriage.15 Several general anesthesia inhalation agents are teratogenic and cross the
placenta. This is of special concern for those patients in the first trimester of pregnancy.24 The risk of iatrogenic injury during surgery
must also be considered. After surgery has been completed, potential problems exist with the use of certain antibiotics, opioids, and
nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory medications.18,23 The lack of prospective trials and understudied risks of laparoscopy have prevented the
extrapolation of laparoscopy's success in the general patient population to the pregnant population. Interestingly, obstetricians have been
safely performing laparoscopic procedures on pregnant patients for decades.7 Women suspected of having ectopic pregnancies have been found
at laparoscopy to have normal first-trimester pregnancies, and have progressed with normal gestations and births.15,16 Reedy et al. recently
published an analysis of a Swedish Health Registry dataset comparing laparoscopy to laparotomy during pregnancy. The authors compared 2181
laparoscopies to 1522 laparotomies stratifying for five fetal outcomes: birth weight, gestational duration, intrauterine growth restriction,
congenital malformations, stillbirths, and neonatal deaths. There was no difference in the five fetal outcome variables between the
laparoscopy and laparotomy groups.27 A survey of the Society of Laparoendoscopic Surgeons addressing complications of laparoscopy in
pregnancy was performed by Reedy et al. Responses to the survey suggested that laparoscopy may be performed safely in the gravid patient.26
It is recognized that selection bias limits the interpretation of this data. In light of these clinical experiences and advancements in
laparoscopic technology, general surgeons are increasingly performing laparoscopic surgery on pregnant patients. To date, the results of
more than 50 laparoscopic cholecystectomies performed in pregnant patients, with 15 concomitant intraoperative cholangiograms, have been
reported. In this group of patients, there were no intraoperative or postoperative complications. Twenty-seven patients had delivered at the
time these reports were published, and all but two children were born healthy and at full term. One child was born at 37 weeks with hyaline
membrane disease, while another patient gave birth to twins at 36 weeks gestation.23 In 1987, Spirtos reported no fetal loss after 13
pregnant patients received diagnostic laparoscopy for suspected appendicitis.7 Schreiber reported the results of six laparoscopic
appendectomies in pregnant patients. There were no maternal complications; however, fetal outcomes were not reported.24 In a more recent
report, Curet et al. describe four laparoscopic appendectomies in which there were no immediate peri-operative complications.23 Fetal
complications in the laparoscopic group included oligohydramnios, tight nuchal cord, macrosomia, and failure to progress. These
complications occurred with no greater incidence than in the same hospital's obstetric population that did not receive surgery. There were
no statistically significant differences between the delivery-related complications observed in the laparoscopic and open laparotomy
groups.23 These reports suggest no significant increase in maternal-fetal complications following the performance of laparoscopic
cholecystectomy or appendectomy.15,22 As experience with laparoscopy increases, the unique diagnostic and therapeutic advantages of this
surgical approach are emerging. In patients who present with confusing clinical pictures, laparoscopy and direct visualization of the
appendix is a valuable diagnostic tool.22,24 In a study of non-pregnant patients, Laine et al. randomized 50 female patients, ages 16 to 40,
with acute right lower abdominal pain to receive either laparoscopy or open appendectomy. Diagnosis in the laparoscopic group was
established in 96% of cases versus 72% in the open group. Unnecessary appendectomies were performed in 44% of open group but only 4% in the
laparoscopic group.27 Intraoperatively, there is less uterine manipulation with laparoscopy and, therefore, there is less risk of preterm
labor and spontaneous abortion.13,18 The majority of laparoscopy's advantages, however, are realized postoperatively. The incisions required
for laparoscopic procedures are smaller and patients experience less postoperative pain, thereby requiring decreased volumes of narcotic
analgesia.9,10,12–14,18,23,28 Less narcotics means less depression of gastrointestinal motility.23 Patients often resume a regular diet
within 24 hours of surgery, reducing fetal nutritional stress. Less narcotics also means less fetal respiratory depression, risk of fetal
narcotic addiction, and in utero fetal narcotic withdrawl.29 Decreased postoperative pain encourages earlier ambulation, which assists in
preventing the formation of deep venous thromboses.17,24 The incidence of wound infection, wound dehiscence, and ventral hernia is less.
Lastly, smaller incisions decrease the formation of abdominal adhesions, which may occur in 70% to 80% of patients undergoing laparotomy.24
The greatest concern of performing laparoscopy during pregnancy is the carbon dioxide (CO2) insufflation of the abdomen to maintain an
operative visual field. Insufflation increases intra-abdominal pressures and may decrease venous return to the heart and subsequent cardiac
output. Maternal hypotension and fetal hypoxia potentiate the risks of intraoperative fetal morbidity and mortality. Increased intra-
abdominal pressures may also restrict blood flow to the uterus by directly compressing the uterine vasculature.23 Fetal acidosis is a
potential complication of creating a pneumoperitoneum. Carbon dioxide has been reported to diffuse across placental membranes in both animal
and human models. Hunter et al. described the effects of a pneumoperitoneum on the acid-base status, heart rate, and blood pressure in
pregnant sheep. Creating a CO2 pneumoperitoneum decreased the pH into acidemic range of both mother and fetus, increased mean fetal heart
rate, and increased mean fetal arterial pressure. After desufflation all values returned to normal. These changes were not observed when
insufflation was performed with nitrous oxide. Hunter concluded that hypercarbia and not increased intra-abdominal pressure was the cause of
the changes seen, and there did not appear to be significant risk to the healthy fetus.13 Amos et al. also reported findings in animal
models. Those who underwent CO2 insufflation developed maternal and fetal hypoxemia, acidosis, hypercarbia, and increased variability in
heart rate and blood pressure.15 Curet et al. studied the effects of CO2 pneumoperitoneum in pregnant ewes. A CO2 pneumoperitoneum of 15
mmHg for 30 minutes resulted in a decrease in uterine blood flow, increased intra-abdominal pressure, maternal tachycardia, fetal
hypertension, and maternal and fetal acidosis. All ewes delivered healthy lambs at full gestation, and there were no long-term deleterious
effects.10 The placenta is usually adept at the removal of CO2 from the circulation and protecting the fetus from adverse effects. This
protective mechanism makes the observed intraoperative elevations in end-tidal CO2 and PaCO2 less concerning, especially in those patients
without pre-existing cardiopulmonary disease.14,18 Unfortunately, the altered physiologic state of pregnancy increases patients'
susceptibility for developing a metabolic acidosis.29 The concern is that the compensatory mechanisms (increases in ventilation) aimed at
maintaining an acid-base equilibrium may be insufficient to prevent the formation of an acidosis during the prolonged exposure to CO2 which
occurs with abdominal insufflation.13 Maternal hyperventilation during surgery should minimize maternal PaCO2 and pHa.28 In all of our
reported cases, the CO2 insufflation pressures were maintained below 15 mmHg. One final complication of laparoscopy in pregnancy is uterine
injury due to inadvertent puncture by the Veress needle or during trocar insertion.5,7,11,30 This may result in uterine insufflation and CO2
embolization.5 In all of our cases, only the Hasson trocar was utilized. Recommendations have been published outlining how to avoid the
potential complications of laparoscopy during pregnancy. The second trimester appears to be the optimal window for surgical intervention
because organogenesis is complete, and there is minimal teratogenic risk.5,7,13,18,25,29 In addition, a second trimester uterus will not
obstruct the operative visual field or disrupt surgical technique.5 Less uterine manipulation decreases the risk of preterm labor and
spontaneous abortion. During surgical management there are technical maneuvers which may minimize operative morbidity. Preoperatively, the
patient should be positioned towards a left lateral decubitus position to displace the intra-abdominal pressures of the pneumoperitoneum and
the gravid uterus away from the inferior vena cava and increase venous return.13,25,29 Some authors recommend an oral antacid (e.g., sodium
citrate, 30 ml) and metoclopramide, 10 mg, IV prior to surgery to reduce the risk of pulmonary acid aspiration.28 The patient should wear
lower extremity pneumatic compression devices throughout surgery and postoperatively until the patient begins to ambulate. Regional
anesthesia is preferred in pregnant patients even though general anesthesia presents minimal risk to the fetus from the second trimester
onwards. Access to the peritoneal cavity is best achieved through the use of a Hasson trocar.14,16 This method avoids the use of the Veress
needle, decreasing the risk of uterine or intra-abdominal injury due to blind needle placement. Carbon dioxide pressures should be
maintained between 10 mmHg and 15 mmHg.14,25 Intraoperative monitoring of maternal end-tidal CO2 and PaCO2 is advised to assess acid-base
balance.15,28 Lastly, a consensus has not been reached on the necessity of intraoperative fetal heart monitoring. The decision to monitor
with transvaginal or abdominal ultrasound during the surgical procedure appears to be patient-specific based on severity of illness, age of
the fetus, and the level of involvement of consulting obstetricians.13,14,28,29 This report adds to the growing evidence that laparoscopic
cholecystectomy and laparoscopic appendectomy can be performed safely in pregnancy. The procedure should be performed by an experienced
laparoscopist. The technique with the Hasson trocar should be utilized. A slight left lateral decubitus position may be advantageous.
Insufflation pressures should be kept below 15 mmHg. Any manipulation of the uterus should be avoided. There is some concern that two
patients in our series did deliver pre-term, but the ultimate outcomes were favorable for both mother and child. The authors wish to thank
Michael A. Dunn, MD, for his great efforts and assistance in the preparation of this manuscript. The opinions contained herein do not
necessarily reflect the opinions of U.S. Department of the Army or Department of Defense.
