A review of the English literature concerning spilled gallstones during laparoscopic cholecystectomy is compared with one institution's
experience of four cases during 1,726 laparoscopic cholecystectomies performed over a four-year period. Strategies regarding management and
treatment are discussed. Our purpose was to report the occurrence of abscess following spilled gallstones during laparoscopic
cholecystectomy as experienced at Good Samaritan Hospital, and to compare it to the experience of other institutions in order to identify
the incidence, characteristics and possible risk factors for the development of this complication. Four case reports of abscess following
spilled gallstones during laparoscopic cholecystectomy are presented. The English literature was reviewed, and characteristics of the case
reports found in the literature were compared. In four years at this institution, four reports of abscess formation following laparoscopic
cholecystectomy have been identified. Two occurred in elderly females and were located in the right flank in both. Two were in middle-aged
men, both diabetic. One abscess was in the right flank and one in the right pleural space. Twenty-three cases were found in the literature.
The average age was 65 years; there were 12 men and 11 women. The locations of abscess formation were trocar sites (most common), right
subphrenic space, right flank or retroperitoneum, and pelvis. The average time to presentation was 4-5 months (range 4 days - 12 months).
Abscess formation following spilled gall-stones during laparoscopic cholecystectomy occurs infrequently, but can be debilitating and require
more than one procedure. The older population appears to be at greater risk. Future prospective studies of patients who undergo laparoscopic
cholecystectomy are needed to more accurately determine the incidence of this complication and to identify the population at risk.
Laparoscopic cholecystectomy is the standard of care for the surgical treatment of gallbladder disease. Since its introduction in 1987 by
Dubois et al.,1 the surgical community has sought to determine the full spectrum of complications associated with this technique. Several
published series of laparoscopic cholecystectomies have found an overall morbidity of about 5%.2–4 The most common complications were
retained common bile duct stones, bile leak, superficial wound infection, and, the most serious, bile duct injury. One complication that may
be occurring more often with the laparoscopic technique is gallbladder perforation and spillage of stones into the peritoneal cavity. How
often this event leads to adverse sequela remains unanswered. In the following article, four cases of adverse sequela from spilled
gallstones are presented with an extensive review of the literature in order to evaluate the incidence, etiology, possible risk factors, and
treatment of spilled gallstones and intra-abdominal abscess. Six weeks following coronary artery bypass grafting (CABG), a 58-year-old white
male with uncontrolled diabetes developed right upper quadrant pain, nausea, vomiting and elevated liver function tests. He underwent
laparoscopic cholecystectomy for acute cholecystitis. There was spillage of stones and bile during the case and only some of the stones were
retrieved. His initial postoperative course was uneventful. He presented three months later, febrile, complaining of right upper quadrant
and right flank pain. Computed tomography (CT) of the abdomen revealed a large subhepatic and retroperitoneal fluid collection which was
percutaneously drained (Figure 1). The culture grew Klebsiella. He was treated with intravenous piperacillin and then switched to oral
ciprofloxacin for a ten day course. His symptoms were relieved only to recur two months later. The CT scan showed recurrence of the abscess
(Figure 2). He was taken to the operating room for a posterior exploration that revealed retained gallstones at the base of the abscess.
These were removed and the wound debrided and irrigated. The culture again grew Klebsiella sensitive to ciprofloxacin. He was discharged
with another course of ciprofloxacin and wound care. He returned again five months later to have further debridement. He has since required
another exploration in the operating room and is currently recovering. Retroperitoneal abscess three months after laparoscopic
cholecystectomy. Stones were spilled during the procedure. Stones were removed during open debridement. Recurrent abscess two months after
percutaneous drainage of abscess in Figure 1. A 53-year-old white male, status post CABG, underwent elective laparoscopic cholecystectomy
for chronic cholecystitis during which there was spillage of bile and stones into the peritoneal cavity. He received a preoperative dose of
cefotetan and was discharged home on amoxicillin/clavulanic acid. He returned six days later with fever and leukocytosis. A CT of the
abdomen revealed a right pleural effusion and a fluid collection in the gallbladder fossa (Figure 3). The fluid was percutaneously drained,
and the culture grew Enterococcus sensitive to ampicillin. He was treated with intravenous cefotetan and metronidazole and discharged on
amoxicillin/clavulanic acid with resolution of his symptoms. Pleural effusion six days after laparoscopic cholecystectomy with stone
spillage. An 85-year-old white female presented to the emergency department complaining of a painful indurated area over her right flank.
The patient reportedly fell at home three days prior to presentation and hit her right side on a chair. She did not admit to any other
injuries. She also denied recent febrile illness. She did report occasional pain over her right side but attributed this to her
osteoarthritis. Laboratory evaluation demonstrated a white blood cell count of 15,000 with a left shift. She had a history of laparoscopic
cholecystectomy in 1991 and reported persistent pain in her right upper quadrant since her surgery. A right upper quadrant ultrasound
revealed no abnormalities. Laboratory studies were also negative. She denied history of jaundice, dark urine or acholic stools. The area
over the right flank was clinically felt to represent an abscess of unknown etiology and was opened in the emergency department under local
anesthesia. A large amount of pus was released and the wound was packed open. A CT scan was ordered to rule out a perforated viscus or a
renal tumor. The next morning numerous small gallstones were noted to be on the packing as it was removed. The CT scan showed a large
abscess cavity involving the right retroperitoneum (Figure 4). The patient was taken to the operating room where the cavity was widely
opened and drained. Additional gallstones were recovered. The patient recovered without any additional problems and the wound is now healed.
Retroperitoneal abscess several years after laparoscopic cholecystectomy. Bright area in center of abscess represents "spilled" gallstones
that were removed during abscess drainage. A 91-year-old white female nursing home resident was found to have a chronically draining sinus
tract located on her right side just above the posterior superior iliac spine. She had previously undergone drainage of a subcutaneous
abscess in this location. This condition had been managed with repeated local debridements and dressing changes for a period of two years. A
sinogram was obtained in an effort to elucidate the etiology of the problem, but it was not helpful. The patient underwent a formal
debridement of the area in an effort to eliminate the source of chronic infection. As the tract was explored, a large (2 × 2 cm) gallstone
was retrieved from the tract with several smaller stones. The wound was packed open and had healed after two weeks. The patient had
undergone a laparoscopic cholecystectomy 30 months prior to her presentation to our service. The complication of gallbladder perforation and
spilled gallstones has been reviewed by several authors2,3,5–7 (Table 1). The incidence of perforation ranged from 9% to 40% stones were
retained 1% to 13% of the time. Soper et al.6 conducted a prospective study specifically designed to identify the rate of spilled stones.
They reported a rate of 32%, with a 5% incidence of acute gallbladders. Incidence of Perforation NL = not listed; GB = gallbladder The
incidence of gallbladder perforation is believed to exceed that of the traditional open method, although not officially reported in the
literature. During laparoscopic cholecystectomy, there are three maneuvers that can result in gallbladder perforation. First, the
gallbladder is used for traction to assist in the dissection of the cystic duct and cystic artery. This exposes the gallbladder to excessive
traction forces and graspers that may tear the wall of the gall-bladder. Secondly, the gallbladder may be entered during dissection from the
liver bed. Finally, the gallbladder is extracted from the abdomen through a small incision, at which time it may be put under high
pressures. Perforation is easily avoided if extension of the skin incision is per-formed when needed. The amount of inflammation pre-sent
may also contribute to the rate of perforation. Inflammation could cause the gallbladder wall to be friable and more prone to tearing under
the stress of traction. It may also cause it to be more difficult to define the plane between the liver and the gallbladder during
dissection. Huang and colleagues5 found that 12 of 20 gallbladders perforated were acutely inflamed. Despite the high rate of perforation
and associated stone spillage, it is not entirely clear what the full implications of this event are. In the one prospective analysis of
this problem, Soper et al.6 found only an increase in operative time when perforation and spillage occurred. This time was spent retrieving
stones and irrigating the abdomen. None of the 250 patients developed an intra-abdominal abscess over a 3-16 month follow-up. Nonetheless,
abscess formation or chronically draining sinus tracts due to retained stones has been documented. In Donohue's3 series, a patient required
laparotomy with drainage of the abscess and removal of the retained stones. A patient in Huang's5 series developed a chronically draining
sinus tract at the subcostal trocar site. The authors of this review have encountered four cases of intra-abdominal abscess due to spilled
stones during laparoscopic cholecystectomy. Three of the laparoscopic cholecystectomies were done at Good Samaritan Hospital where 1,726
laparoscopic cholecystectomies have been performed since 1993. The fourth case was performed at a smaller affiliate hospital. Two of these
four presented back at Good Samaritan Hospital where the diagnosis of abscess secondary to spilled stones was made. The other two patients
were evaluated at other hospitals. Although it has not been prospectively evaluated, it is the authors' experience that stones are spilled
frequently. How the stones are dealt with appears to be surgeon-specific, depending on the perceived severity of the spillage. Finally,
there are 23 case reports in the English literature dating back to 1992 that describe intra-abdominal abscess secondary to retained
gallstones1,5,12–29 (Table 3). The mean age of the patients was 65 years (range 31-90 years). The gender distribution was 12 males and 11
females. The average time to presentation was 4-5 months (range 4 days - 12 months). The abscess or sinus tract was located by CT or
ultrasound. The sites of involvement were all trocar sites (7), subphrenic (5), right flank or retroperitoneum (3), subhepatic (4), omentum
(3), pulmonary (2), pelvis/ovary (4). Some cases had more than one location. Four cases required more than one procedure. The bacteria
involved (when described) were Escherichia coli (6), Klebsiella (4), Enterobacter (1), Enterococcus (1), Lactobacillus (1), and Serratia
(1). The gallbladder was acutely inflamed in five cases. Of these, 2 were empyema and one was gangrenous. The type of stone extracted, when
reported, was bilirubinate in four and cholesterol in one. Incidence of Abscess SSC = Southern Surgeons Club Reported Cases in the
Literature RUQ=right upper quadrant; GB=gallbladder; I&D=incision & drainage; NR=not recorded; BSO=bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy;
IDDM=insulin dependent diabetes mellitus; NIDDM= non-insulin dependent diabetes mellitus Despite the high rate of spillage reported in the
literature, the incidence of abscess appears to be low (Table 2). Our experience at Good Samaritan Hospital is similar to these reports:
four cases of abscess out of 1,726 laparoscopic cholecystectomies done in four years. This causes one to wonder what it is about those
patients who develop abscesses that puts them at risk. After reviewing the 23 case reports in the literature, a few observations were made.
The mean age of the patients, 65 years, exceeded the mean age of patients undergoing laparoscopic cholecystectomy by more than ten
years.3–6,8,9 Two of the patients described in the literature, and two of our patients were documented as being diabetic; also, two patients
had a recent history of CABG suggesting that the patient's medical condition may increase the risk for abscess formation. The type and
amount of biliary disease may also put the patient at risk. As previously mentioned, patients with acute cholecystitis may be more likely to
experience spillage of bile and stones. Even in the absence of clinically acute inflammation, up to 30% of bile cultures are positive for
bacteria.30 Whether the bile is infected or not may not be as important to abscess formation as the stone itself. In an animal study,
Johnston, et al.30 found that rats under-going laparotomy with placement of a stone and bile intraperitoneally developed adhesions around
the stone. Two rats developed abscess at the stone site. Surprisingly, the bile was sterile in the group that developed abscess. It is
possible that the stone itself harbored active bacteria. A study by Stewart et al.31 examined 32 pigment stones and 35 cholesterol stones.
Seventy-eight percent of the pigment stones had evidence of bacterial microcolonies whereas none of the cholesterol stones showed evidence
of bacteria. Only five of the 23 cases reported in the literature document the type of stone spilled. Of these, four were found to be
bilirubinate. This spillage of black pigment stones may be more likely to precipitate an abscess. Prevention of abscess by prevention of
spillage is the best policy. Gentle traction and careful dissection should be maintained in all cases. If perforation does occur, the spill
should be contained by placing an endo-loop or clips over the area or placing the grasper in such a way as to close the perforation. This
may prevent stones from falling out during the rest of the dissection. Removal of the gallbladder from the epigastric or umbilical incision
should be visualized with the scope to identify spillage if it occurs. If the stone or stones are too large, the fascial incision can be
easily extended. The gallbladder can be suction evacuated to reduce its size, and the stones removed with a ring forceps. Finally, the
gallbladder can be placed in a sterile bag for removal. When stones are spilled, as many as possible should be retrieved, even if operative
time is increased. Several devices exist to facilitate this process. One may use a spoon, disposable bag or sleeve, or the large 20-mm
shuttle collector. There are some who recommend immediate laparotomy for spilled stone removal. Most authors disagree with this approach,
believing that time is better spent preventing perforation, containing the spill, and retrieving stones laparoscopically, since most
patients will not develop a major complication from this event. The role of perioperative antibiotics in prevention of postoperative abscess
has not been defined, but probably has little effect. When intra-abdominal abscess does occur most patients present within five months, but
some may take longer than one year. The diagnosis should be suspected if the patient has a history of laparoscopic cholecystectomy. The
operative record should be reviewed for report of stone spillage during the procedure, although this may not be accurate. The authors of
this review now consistently document whether stones were spilled and if the stones were retrieved, but this is most likely an exception to
the usual dictated reports. The operative reports of the four cases in this study did not describe perforation or spillage of stones. Also,
the pathology report may be helpful if no stones were found with the specimen, especially if stones were documented by preoperative
ultrasound. This was the case in the fourth patient. The typical symptoms are pain and fever. A chronic sinus tract may also be present. The
diagnosis is made by CT or ultrasound, and first attempts at cure are made using these modalities for percutaneous drainage. Additional
procedures may be required, and some patients may require laparotomy for complete drainage and removal of stones. Antibiotic coverage should
be based on culture results and coverage of the more common biliary organisms. During laparoscopic cholecystectomy, perforation of the
gallbladder with spillage of stones is common, but the development of intra-abdominal abscess is not. Because of the low incidence of intra
abdominal abscess, immediate laparotomy is not indicated, but attempts should be made to remove all the stones laparoscopically. Meticulous
surgical technique is the best preventative measure. When intra-abdominal abscesses do occur, they can be very debilitating and require more
than one procedure to achieve resolution of the abscess. After reviewing the available data in the literature, there may be a patient
population at higher risk for developing long-term complications from retained gallstones. Older, debilitated patients with underlying
medical conditions (i.e., IDDM) may be at greater risk. A prospective analysis of all patients undergoing laparoscopic cholecystectomy is
needed to accurately determine the incidence of these long-term complications and the specific population at risk. Presented at the Annual
Meeting of the Society of Laparoendoscopic Surgeons, Endo Expo ′96, December 5-7, 1996 in Orlando, Florida.
