A lung carcinoma with tumor involving more than one lobe or in close proximity to the mainstem bronchus often requires pneumonectomy for
surgical cure. Inflammation, bulky tumors, and dense adhesions limit the operative field of vision and may result in the abandonment of
procedures with potential for complete extirpation. This case illustrates the utility of thoracoscopy in visualization of the hilum and
other neurovascular structures in a patient with a proximal tumor and dense intrathoracic adhesions. Successful resection was made possible
by use of combined open and thoracoscopic modalities. Thoracoscopy's main use in its initial inception and currently is evaluation of
pleural disease. Jacobeus in 19101 reported this technique using a cystoscope for pneumolysis in treatment of tuberculosis. Landreneau
demonstrated the feasibility of thoracoscopy in treatment of eighty-five patients requiring pulmonary resections for small peripheral
lesions.2 Morbidity consisted of atelectasis and pneumonia in two patients, with bleeding and persistent air leak each in one patient.
Similarly, Miller and colleagues successful employed videoscopic resection in evaluation of small peripheral indeterminate pulmonary
nodules, diffuse pulmonary infiltrates, and recurrent pneumothoraces in a series of ten patients.3 The wider utility of thoracoscopy was
shown by Mack et al. in seventy patients, with excision of pulmonary nodules, pericardial drainage, thoracic sympathectomy, and
pleurodesis.4 Length of hospital stays averaged three days and in some instances patients were discharged on postoperative day one. Walker
from the City Hospital in Edinburgh reported the first video-assisted left pneumonectomy in a 51-year-old woman with an adenocarcinoma
involving both upper and lower lobes.5 A limited submammary incision was made through which conventional bronchial and vascular staplers
were introduced. The intact lung was delivered through the fourth interspace thoracotomy and a mediastinal node dissection performed with
video assistance. Final pathology showed a T2N1 tumor with negative station 10 and aortic nodes. We report the case of a 54-year-old white
man who presented to his primary care physician with a chief complaint of cough, fever, and hemoptysis of two weeks duration. He denied
associated weight loss or chest pain, but did experience dyspnea with mild exertion. A forty pack/year history of smoking was noted, the
patient having quit tobacco use for the past five years, along with no reported exposure to tuberculosis. Initial chest radiograph showed a
right upper lobe infiltrate. After intermittent oral antibiotics for six weeks and no resolution of his symptoms a repeat chest radiograph
(Figure 1) demonstrated progression of his infiltrate to lobar atelectasis. Posterior-anterior view chest radiograph demonstrating right
upper lobe atelectasis. Further evaluation with computed tomography of the chest (Figure 2) showed an irregular mass obstructing the right
upper lobe bronchus and dense consolidation of the lobe immediately adjacent to the posterior thorax and pericardium. Pulmonary function
tests yielded an FEV1 of 2.1 L (74% predicted) and a room air PaO2 of 81 Torr. Fiberoptic bronchoscopy and biopsy allowed visualization of a
focal carcinoma in situ with areas of microinvasion and severe dysplasia in the right upper lobe and bronchus intermedius. Computed tomogram
of the chest with intravenous contrast. A solid mass adjacent to the pericardium and subclavian vessels is noted. After placement of a
thoracic epidural catheter for postoperative analgesia, and a double lumen endotracheal tube for selective lung ventilation, a standard
posterolateral thoracotomy was performed through the fourth interspace. Dense pleural adhesions with a semi-fixed, noncompressible right
upper and middle lobe were encountered on entry to the thorax. After initial lysis of adhesions broad fibrous bands tethered the atelectatic
upper lobe to the subclavian vessels, azygous vein, and esophagus. Inability to retract the upper lobe precluded visualization of these
structures which were not amenable to simple blunt dissection. Introduction of a 30-degree thoracoscope and use of laparoscopic
electrosurgical and scissor dissection allowed continued progress. Multiple biopsies of fibrous tissue encountered and adjacent pleura were
sent for frozen section to insure the absence of malignant cells and hence, resectability of the tumor. Having completed division of the
adhesions from the upper lobe, the thoracoscope was employed to assist in dissection of the pulmonary artery and superior pulmonary vein.
The resection was completed with stapling of the right mainstem bronchus and individual pulmonary vessels. The bronchial margin was free of
tumor. A moderately differentiated, deeply infiltrating squamous cell carcinoma of the right upper and middle lobe bronchi was found on
pathological examination. (Figure 3) Station 2, 4, 7, and 9 nodes were free of tumor. Gross specimen demonstrates a deeply infiltrating
squamous cell tumor of the right upper and middle lobe bronchus. Applications of thoracoscopy include pleural evaluation, lung biopsy,
operations on patients with limited pulmonary reserve, pericardial procedures, and lymph node dissection for lung carcinoma staging.
Decortication and pleurodesis, lung volume reduction, blebectomy in treatment of spontaneous pneumothorax, coronary revascularization, and
major lung resection are modalities currently being investigated. Alternatives to thoracoscopic assistance as described in this case include
a median sternotomy approach with isolation of the intrapericardial segments of the pulmonary vessels and more direct access to the
subclavian vessels and brachial plexus. Similarly, laser bronchoscopy with tumor ablation might be employed preoperatively to allow
resolution of the acute inflammatory process and facilitate a standard resection. While in this case a pneumonectomy was mandated, thick
fibrous adhesions limiting operative exposure can also occur in a subgroup of patients who might require only a simple lobectomy. Standard
posterolateral thoracotomy with a counter incision through the second interspace or disarticulation at the costomanubrial junction is also
possible to achieve wider field of vision. The feasibility of pneumonectomy through a limited thoracotomy without compromising surgical
margins or lymph node sampling has been demonstrated. Our work shows that thoracoscopy is an invaluable tool when used as a primary surgical
modality or in concert with open thoracotomy and should be considered as an option when visualization is restricted by fixed structures
(i.e., chest wall, inflammatory mass, tumor). Accurate evaluation with optimal visualization of the surgical field can profoundly affect the
decision to proceed with or abort a potentially curative resection. Success of thoracoscopic lysis of pleural adhesions suggests the option
of limited thoracotomy in pneumonectomy even in the presence of an active inflammatory process. Cost-containment and managed care issues
notwithstanding, the decrease in postoperative intercostal neuritis and reduction in recovery time enjoyed by patients undergoing
thoracoscopy versus thoracotomy invites us to expand the role of thoracoscopy to the most complex of thoracic procedures including
pneumonectomy.
